---
layout: page
title: Democracy
permalink: /democracy/
---

## Democracy as a Dogma

Democracy, or a government which is ruled by the people either directly or indirectly, is dogmatically upheld as an inherent good. Under this view, systems of government are good because they allow people to have a say, and thus any oppressive set of policies will be voted out by the people. Anyone who disagrees with democracy to any degree or expresses skepticism of it is often seen with suspicion. But it should be noted that many areas of life are undemocratic and we don't particularly care about it. For example, rights enshrined in constitutions or related documents in countries are undemocratically upheld, as majority votes either directly or indirectly would not necessarily lead to them being removed or modified, even if it was the "will of the people". In a sense, rights can be said to be anything which is granted in a state which exists outside of public debate.

Furthermore, many industrialized countries have large aspects of their policy decided in a purely undemocratic way in the form of central banks. Central banks in places such as the United States, Canada, and Europe, are said to be "independent"<ref>https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/blog/date/2025/html/ecb.blog.20251223~aad70ce537.en.html</ref>, a policy move widely advocated for by economists (for a broader discussion of central banking, see [On Monetary Policy](https://prometheandissident.github.io/economics/#on-monetary-policy)). In practice, this simply means that central banks are managed independently of the political process, meaning they are completely non-democratically run. Research consistently shows that central bank independence is related to lower and more stable inflation<ref>https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/fandd/issues/Series/Back-to-Basics/Monetary-Policy</ref>. This is because central banks run independently of the political process tend to think more long-term, and are more effectively able to stabilize inflation expectations due to their current policy not being put in jeopardy every election season. Instead of being run democratically, independent central banks are run by groups of experts<ref>https://www.bruegel.org/system/files/2022-07/PC%2012%202022.pdf</ref>, often employing mathematical models to attempt to identify optimal policy. In some cases, such as Canada, policy aims to optimize for just price stability under a "sole mandate", while other countries such as the United States attempt to balance price stability and full employment under a "dual mandate"<ref>https://business.purdue.edu/daniels-insights/posts/2025/the-feds-duel-mandate.php</ref>. Monetary policy is not some unimportant aspect of governance. It is one of the most important policy tools meant to address economic recessions and the general welfare of the economy, and yet it is conducted in a completely undemocratic way.

The example of central bank governance shows that democracy must not be seen as an ends in itself, but rather as a means to an end. It is one system which aims to promote effective decision-making. Insofar as it may not promote effective decision-making, it should be modified or thrown out.

### Voting Age as a Case Study

There is a strong case to be made that our current political arrangement doesn't even intrinsically value democracy as a good in the way which people sell it. Consider the institution of a minimum voting age. Democracies vary in where they set the voting age, with most setting it to 18. Some set it as low as 16, including Austria, Argentina, and Brazil among others<ref>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Voting_age#/media/File:Voting_Age_-_Global.svg</ref>. This means that virtually every democracy prevents a significant proportion of its population from actually participating in it. In that case, can they truly be considered democratic?

Several arguments have been made in favor of instituting a legal voting age. These consistently deal with some trait which is more likely to exist after the cutoff than before, such as having a stake in the society, having intelligence/competence to know what policies are good, or having life experience. However, for all of these demarcators, there are plenty of instances where a person below the voting age would score better than a person above the voting age. It would be one thing is this was a case where it was difficult to determine who was, for instance, intelligent versus unintelligent, and thus it is preferable to have some rough proxy such as age instituted instead. All of these things could be directly measured. Intelligence or competence could be measured through an IQ test or political knowledge test (ex. basic questions about the structure of the government). Similarly, having a stake could be measured through whether one owns property, assuming that there is even a reasonable way to measure "stakes".

Irrespective of the ability to directly measure these traits, this suggests that people care about the "quality" of the voting population, however defined, and are willing to restrict voting rights to certain people to improve it. A consistent understanding of this would be a recognition that democracy is not an intrinsic good, but a means to an end. It would furthermore be open to other ways to measure the "quality" of a voter, which would be irrespective of age (ex. IQ testing), even if it would lead to some people previously above the voting age being no longer allowed to vote.

### The Iron Law of Oligarchy

### Conclusion on Democratic Dogmatism

Bryan Caplan addresses democratic dogmatism in chapter 8 of his book "The Myth of the Rational Voter", pointing to the research of psychologist Philip Tetlock. As Tetlock observes, _“people often insist with apparently great conviction that certain relationships and commitments are sacred and that even to contemplate trade-offs with the secular values of money or convenience is anathema”_<ref>The Myth of the Rational Voter: Chapter 8</ref>. Democracy is an example of this.

The purpose of this discussion is not to suggest that democracy is bad. Rather, it is to open up the dialogue in favor of alternative political systems, and have a fair and honest comparison of them without putting one system up on a pedestal. It is when systems are taken seriously relative to one another, without an automatic attachment to one over another, that a more mature examination of governance can be had.

## Principles of Democracy

A typical economist view of consumption assumes that individuals are rational actors who will purchase and consume goods which will maximize their utility. Many attempt to apply this model to democracy, suggesting that individuals have the greatest knowledge of their preferences, and so aggregating their preferences through voting will allow for the best policies to be decided upon. Under a pure rational view of voting, does democracy work?

Suppose that there are two societies: Society A with only 10 voters and Society B with 1 million. Suppose in both societies they have to decide between two policies, policy X and policy Y. The policy which gets a simple majority vote is the one which is enacted. In Society A, the marginal effect of one person participating versus not participating in the election is substantial. If there is substantial disagreement amongst the people in Society A over whether policy X or policy Y is better, one person can cause the election to tip in favor of one policy over the other. In this case, if an individual has a substantial preference of one policy over another, they will rationally choose to vote, even if it has an opportunity cost associated with it, as their expected payoff from voting is substantial. Now take Society B with a population of 1 million voters. In this case, it is highly unlikely that an individual will willingly vote as the marginal benefit of them voting with nearly 1 millino other people also voting will be approximately zero, with a non-zero opportunity cost associated with voting. Thus, in sufficiently large societies, rational, utility-maximizing voters who only care about the policy effects of voting will rationally choose to abstain from voting. This is commonly referred to as the "paradox of voting"<ref>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paradox_of_voting</ref>.

Many economists, recognizing that the marginal benefit of an individual voting is miniscule, argue that in such circumstances it is rational for voters to not pay much attention to what policies would maximize their utility. This is often referred to as "rational ignorance"<ref>The Myth of the Rational Voter: Chapter 1</ref>. According to a rational ignorance model, so long as rational ignorance does not lead to systematic biases in one particular direction surrounding what optimal policy is, then as long as there are some voters who know what the optimal policy is, democracy will naturally lead to the best policies being implemented. This result has been termed "the miracle of aggregation". As such, despite the fact that, for example, significant amounts of evidence shows that voters are ignorant of basic things about how their democratic institutions work and function, this shouldn't necessarily lead to any real effects on political or policy outcomes.

However, in reality people are not merely ignorant, but ignorant in systematically biased ways<ref>The Myth of the Rational Voter: Chapter 1</ref>. In his book "The Myth of the Rational Voter", Bryan Caplan points to four major biases which people tend to exhibit which inhibits their ability to make rational policy decisions:

- Anti-market bias - People do not understand the “invisible hand” of the market and how it harmonizes greed with public interest.
- Anti-foreign bias - People underestimate the benefits of interaction with foreigners.
- Make-work bias - People conflate prosperity with employment as opposed to production.
- Pessimistic bias - People are overly prone to think that economic conditions are bad and getting worse.

These biases tend to lead to individuals opposing economic freedom and immigration, despite their demonstrable benefits on people's quality of life (see [The Literature on Free Markets Versus Central Planning](https://prometheandissident.github.io/economics/#the-literature-on-free-markets-versus-central-planning) and [Immigration](https://prometheandissident.github.io/economics/#immigration)). There are many circumstances where people do not have systematic biases in their decision-making. For example, research from Francis Galton in the early 20th century showed that while individuals are oftentimes inaccurate in guessing the true weight of an ox, averaging all of the guesses produces a surprisingly close estimate to the true weight of an ox<ref>https://blogs.cornell.edu/info2040/2011/11/16/social-influence-and-the-wisdom-of-the-crowds/</ref>. The problem is that once decisions involve issues which are more personal and social in nature, such as economic policy, people are more likely to make biases. This is in part due to the fact that people have "preferences" over beliefs in themselves when it comes to political issues. Religious beliefs are often viewed as irrational yet provide a sense of purpose and are associated with greater well-being. But research shows that many of the neurobiological correlates of political belief as the same as those of religious belief<ref>https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5180221/</ref><ref>https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7195862/</ref>. In other words, political belief is neurologically identical to religious belief (for a more extensive discussion, see [Understanding Political Belief](https://prometheandissident.github.io/psychology/#understanding-political-belief)). As Bryan Caplan says in his book<ref>The Myth of the Rational Voter: Chapter 1</ref>:

_“Natural scientists have long known that the majority of people disbelieve some of their findings because they contradict religion. Social scientists need to learn that the majority disbelieves some of their findings because they contradict quasi-religion.”_

The reason why the consumer goods model of democracy fails is that it assumes that individuals have no intrinsic attachment to beliefs, when in reality they do, and it treats democracy less like a private good and more like a common good. Private goods, which are rivalrous and excludable, are generally analyzed solely in terms of the private utility that they bring to individual consumers. However, pure democracy is better understood as analogous to a common good, which is also rivalrous, but non-excludable. Democracy can be said to be rivalrous in that an individual person's vote can be cancelled out by another person's vote in the opposite direction, and it is non-excludable in that there is universal suffrage. Democracy can thus be argued to be a tragedy of the commons<ref>https://thewaywardaxolotl.blogspot.com/2015/05/democracy-is-tragedy-of-commons.html</ref>, where a tragedy of the commons refers to how a common resource can get overused due to people gaining private benefits from its use without directly incurring all of the social costs that such private use creates. Democracy is a tragedy of the commons-esque situation because the primary individual benefit associated with voting is not to receive some payoff from getting an optimal policy, but rather as a means to express oneself<ref>The Myth of the Rational Voter: Chapter 5</ref>. If one is religiously attached to their political views, voting can be seen as a religious ritual in which the ritual itself is the benefit associated with voting. This leads to private benefits of voting creating social costs for the rest of society, as it leads to a net decrease in the quality of policies which end up getting implemented.

In economics, tragedy of the commons situations are generally solved in one of two ways. There is the top-down approach, whereby regulations are imposed to prevent the commons from being overused, such as a Pigouvian tax which imposes a cost to use the commons<ref>https://www.investopedia.com/terms/p/pigoviantax.asp</ref>. There is also the market approach, whereby property rights are established to ensure that the commons is privately owned, ensuring that there is an agent that has an incentive to maintain the commons and not overuse it<ref>https://www.investopedia.com/terms/c/coase-theorem.asp</ref>. In the context of voting, this would either imply that costs need to be imposed on voters for voting, or we ought to organize the political system such that voters have a more direct stake in what happens electorally. This is not to suggest that either solution would be more desirable to the status quo, but it does mean that there are "market failures" to democracy which should be seriously considered and examined.

Another challenge to the typical economist view of consumption being used to examine voting behavior is that it assumes that people value their own personal material benefits associated with voting when it comes to their voting decision. Empirical evidence shows that the self-interested voter hypothesis is false<ref>The Myth of the Rational Voter: Chapter 6</ref>. There are numerous cases where there is little connection or a reverse connection between voting decisions, and one's material interests. For example, Bryan Caplan at the time of writing his book points out that the elderly are if anything slightly less supportive of social security and medicare compared to the rest of the population. Furthermore, men are more pro-choice than women<ref>The Myth of the Rational Voter: Chapter 1</ref>.

### The Danger and Inevitability of Populism

Populism is a political strategy that focuses on the conflict between "the people" and "the elites". It can thus be understood as something which is not intrinsic to the left or the right. In fact, populism of both varieties has been on the rise in recent decades. This is likely because of rising polarization, as populism is closely related to societal polarization, as there is a high correlation between public opinion regarding the division of society between “ordinary people and the corrupt elites who exploit them” and social polarization<ref>https://www.idea.int/blog/explainer-populism-left-and-right-progressive-and-regressive</ref>. There is also some evidence suggesting that cultural backlash contributes to the rise of populism<ref>https://www.hks.harvard.edu/publications/trump-brexit-and-rise-populism-economic-have-nots-and-cultural-backlash</ref>, which could also be an explanatory factor. A leader is considered populist if they place the alleged struggle of the people against the elites as the center of their political campaign and governing style.

Populism is both a cause and a consequences of economic hardship. Populism at the country level has been around for over 100 years but has reached a historical high recently. It is associated with lower growth rates over the next 5 years after a populist gains power, as well as the next 15 years<ref>https://cepr.org/voxeu/columns/cost-populism-evidence-history</ref>. The longer both right- and left-wing populists are in power, the greater inflation becomes. Inflation is worse under left-wing populists than right-wing populists, but both are still worse than moderate leaders<ref>https://hbr.org/2024/10/when-populists-rise-economies-often-fall</ref>.

Populism is also costly for democratic institutions, being associated with a decline in checks and balances when populist leaders get into power among both left and right-wing cases, as well as lower electoral and press freedoms. Populist leaders rarely leave office without drama, disregarding democratic procedures. Economic nationalism (protectionism) and disintegration (unsustainable macroeconomic policies resulting in spiraling public debt and inflation) are the two main ways in which populist governments harm growth<ref>https://cepr.org/voxeu/columns/cost-populism-evidence-history</ref>. However, populism is also caused by economic hardship. Economic shocks from globalization can help to fuel populism, and helped Trump win the 2016 presidential election<ref>https://www.annualreviews.org/content/journals/10.1146/annurev-economics-070220-032416</ref>.

On average, ordinary democratic governments remain for about 3 years. However, populist governments on average manage to sustain their hold for about 6.5 years, more than double as long. Populists are also more likely to win re-election once or twice and more likely to remain in power for well over a decade. Among populist leaders who entered office between 1990 and 2015, only a small minority left office as a result of the normal democratic process. 50 percent of populists either rewrote or amended their country’s constitution when they gained power, frequently with the aim of eliminating presidential term limits and reducing checks and balances on executive power. Populist rule is associated with lower press freedom, civil liberties, and political rights. In terms of danger to democratic institutions, left-wing populists do not appear to fare much better than right-wing populists<ref>https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2018/12/hard-data-populism-bolsonaro-trump/578878/</ref>.

Populism appears to be an inevitable part of democracy. It is the worst aspects of democracy manifesting in its most extreme form. Populist leaders inspire blind faith in their supporters and change people's minds not with information, but with mere rhetoric. It is not about what is said, but how well it is stated. In the presence of voter irrationality (see [Principles of Democracy](https://prometheandissident.github.io/democracy/#principles-of-democracy)), it leads to the public getting taken advantage of in a way which ultimately harms the society and undermines its institutions. It doesn't just undermine democratic decision-making, but also basic civil liberties and political rights which are crucial for the well-functioning of society (for example, see [Free Speech](https://prometheandissident.github.io/free-speech/)).

It should once again be remembered that this doesn't necessarily mean that democracy is an undesirable system. The question is how well or poorly this system does _relative_ to other systems. However, the harms and inevitability of populism in the present era is at least an indicator that on absolute terms, democracy doesn't perform as well as many might think it does.

## The Literature on Democracy

There is a vast literature whcih examines the relationship between democracy and a variety of other outcomes. In general, democracy is associated with a range of positive outcomes. A study looking at over 1000 statistical estimates found that democracy was positively correlated with an extensive number of outcomes from social policy, economic policy, human rights, criminal justice, and overall government quality<ref>https://statsandsociety.substack.com/p/the-quiet-vindication-of-fukuyama</ref>. Democracies are less warlike than other regimes, particularly in terms of the severity of war<ref>https://www.hawaii.edu/powerkills/DP95.HTM</ref>. In addition, polities with higher levels of democracy are more likely to be politically stable<ref>https://www.jstor.org/stable/intesociscierevi.90.1.01</ref>.

There is very clearly a positive correlation between democracy and economic growth. However, there is a lot of debate about the causal direction, if there is a causal relationship at all<ref>https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/j.1540-5907.2007.00299.x</ref><ref>https://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/abs/10.1086/700936</ref><ref>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1048984317308093</ref><ref>https://0x0.la/u/fcovCUN.pdf</ref><ref>http://www.columbia.edu/~flr9/documents/Rivera-Batiz_Democracy_Governance_Growth.pdf</ref><ref>https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2014/05/democracy-boost-economic-growth/</ref><ref>https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1540-5907.00023</ref><ref>https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/british-journal-of-political-science/article/democracy-political-stability-and-economic-growth/1630FBD0E7690CAF595EE9C612E405AE</ref><ref>https://www.democracy.uci.edu/files/docs/conferences/grad/chen.pdf</ref><ref>https://scholar.harvard.edu/jrobinson/files/jr_econdevelopment.pdf</ref>. I would need to examine this question further to form a stronger opinion on it, although a lot of the mechanisms discussed below in studies for how democracy causes economic growth seem intuitively correct to me. It is clear that while the precise economic effects of democracy have not been determined, it is very unlikely that democracy has negative effects on economic growth. In order to even begin to establish such a relationship, it would first need to be shown that there was a negative correlation between democracy and economic growth, and the existing evidence suggests the exact reverse.

As such, the existing evidence suggests that relative to other present political systems, democracy is at worst neutral and at best beneficial. However, as the economist Garrett Jones points out in chapter 1 of his book "10% Less Democracy: Why you Should Trust Elites a Little More and the Masses a Little Less," there is most likely a "democracy Laffer curve"<ref>10% Less Democracy: Why you Should Trust Elites a Little More and the Masses a Little Less - Chapter 1</ref>. In other words, there can come a point where too much democracy can actually be harmful for outcomes such as economic growth, as there is an inverse-u shaped realtionship between level of democracy and the quality of outcomes. He asserts that we are most likely to the right of the peak, meaning that we may actually be too democratic as a society, and we should consider making society a little bit less democratic to improve outcomes.

In fact, as reviewed by Jones, the Harvard economist Robert Barro indeed found a Laffer curve relationship between democracy and long-run economic growth rates<ref>10% Less Democracy: Why you Should Trust Elites a Little More and the Masses a Little Less - Chapter 1</ref>. He estimated in 1996 that the democracy "bliss point" was fairly low, at an intermediate level of the democracy indicator (around 0.5). Based on  his estimates, further democratization efforts in developing countries such as Malaysia and Mexico at the time would likely reduce growth, and future growth would likely already be slowed in places which have already had political liberalization efforts such as Chile, South Korea, and Taiwan. In Barro's classic estimate, going from an average level of democracy to the highest levels waas associated with 1.6% lower annual economic growth per person. In 30 years, this would be equivalent to two countries starting out at identical spots and ending with one country a third poorer than the other - a significant difference!

## Possible Alternatives to the Status Quo

So, if pure democracy is not to be considered the best system for the well-being of people, what might be alternatives to a mostly or purely democratic system? There are many potential ideas. In general, these ideas have already been implemented to some extent at least prinicpally in some area of government. As such, nothing offered here is a particularly radical departure from what's already been tried, even if done to a stronger extent. Several of these will be discussed in turn, with many ideas being taken from Garret Jones's book "10% Less Democracy: Why you Should Trust Elites a Little More and the Masses a Little Less"<ref>10% Less Democracy: Why you Should Trust Elites a Little More and the Masses a Little Less</ref>.

### Longer Term Limits

A very simple reform which preserves the status quo to a significant degree would be having longer term limits. This makes the system less democratic, as it effectively means that it is less responsive to citizens. However, it would change the incentive structure for political leaders in a way which has the potential to have it function better. In general, politicians have a strong incentive to engage in actions which they can get public credit for, rather than actions which are actually necessary. When the two types do not align, this can create problems. For example, as discussed in [Principles of Democracy](https://prometheandissident.github.io/democracy/#principles-of-democracy), voters are highly sympathetic to protectionist policies, despite their demonstrable economic harms<ref>10% Less Democracy: Why you Should Trust Elites a Little More and the Masses a Little Less - Chapter 2</ref>.

Voters tend to be very forgetful, and as a result, the political system is highly focused on pleasing voters in the short term. However, voters are only able to provide feedback every time there is an election season, and so for the majority of the time that a politician is in office, they can engage in any type of policy-making with little cost to their chances of being re-elected. For example, politicians are more likely to support expert economist consensus on protectionism when an election isn’t near, and they are more likely to engage in protectionist policies as an election gets closer. In addition, senators, who have six year terms, tend to act different from house members, who have two year terms, except when the senators are in cycle. There is also some evidence to suggest that when an election is looming, labor regulation liberalization is less likely to occur, and there is a lower chance for exchange rates to be devalued when a country is facing financial trouble, or it is delayed. This is despite low labor regulations being popular with experts, as is currency devaluation when a country is facing financial trouble<ref>10% Less Democracy: Why you Should Trust Elites a Little More and the Masses a Little Less - Chapter 2</ref>.

As such, reducing the number of election seasons that there are is beneficial for stronger economies, and helps protect against some of the voter biases which Bryan Caplan identifies in his work. As Garrett Jones says, "Longer terms, braver politicians"<ref>10% Less Democracy: Why you Should Trust Elites a Little More and the Masses a Little Less - Chapter 2</ref>.

### Central Bank Independence (Meritocracy and Political Independence)

In practically all high-income countries, including across Europe, Japan, and the United States, central banks are said to be "independent". This means that the central bank is run completely independently from the political process - or in other words, is run undemocratically. Instead of being beholden to the political process, central banks are run in a meritocratic manner, meaning that those with expertise in the subject matter, in this case economists, are those who run the institution. It's well-established that central bank independence leads to lower and more stable inflation, and that in the absence of central bank independence monetary policy is run in a more short-sighted manner (see [On Monetary Policy](https://prometheandissident.github.io/economics/#on-monetary-policy)). This is an example of blatant anti-democratic governance over what is one of the most important economic policy dimensions in a country, and it is one which is both ubiquitous across high-income countries and taken for granted by the average person.

This type of independence and meritocracy in governance is not limited to central banks. In the United States and elsewhere, the judicial branch, a branch of government which is viewed as crucial to its functioning, is handed over to unelected lawyers who oftentimes have long, or lifelong, terms of office. This is similarly never noticed or criticized<ref>10% Less Democracy: Why you Should Trust Elites a Little More and the Masses a Little Less - Chapter 4</ref>. Evidence consistently shows that compared to judges selected by voters, judges selected by a merit commission are better at their jobs. Furthermore, countries with more judicial independence tend to have stronger protections for property rights, fewer steps to legally starting businesses, fewer employment regulations, and less government ownership of the banking system. In other words, political independence guarantees more economic freedom for citizens, something which has been shown to be beneficial for economic growth in a country (see [The Literature on Free Markets Versus Central Planning](https://prometheandissident.github.io/economics/#the-literature-on-free-markets-versus-central-planning)).

City treasurers, who are responsible for managing a city's money, ensuring that taxes are paid on time, and handling borrowing, vary across cities in whether they are appointed or elected<ref>10% Less Democracy: Why you Should Trust Elites a Little More and the Masses a Little Less - Chapter 4</ref>. Research suggests that cities with appointed treasurers tend to have lower borrowing costs<ref>https://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/full/10.1086/668696</ref>, suggesting that elected treasurers tend to be more irresponsible with city money. However, in terms of comparing elected versus appointed regulators, the evidence is more mixed on outcomes<ref>10% Less Democracy: Why you Should Trust Elites a Little More and the Masses a Little Less - Chapter 4</ref>. This suggests that it may be a matter of taste. This could be because while appointed regulators may be more qualified to make policy, they can also be captured by industry interests.

So there are many instances where policy and governance decisions are made meritocratically rather than through democracy<ref>10% Less Democracy: Why you Should Trust Elites a Little More and the Masses a Little Less - Chapter 4</ref>. Should all of them be? The challenge is that while in cases like a central bank, there are one or a small handful of goals that the institution aims to achieve. In areas where values tend to be more heavily debated, such as in social policy, it would be much more risky to leave it up to a meritocratic process. This is because while expertise in these areas could help, meritocracy would also involve testing for "correct" values, which opens up a lot of issues. As such, meritocratic decision-making, if done, should only be done in cases where a clear mandate can be made which is easily justifiable and unlikely to be corrupted.

One area where this could be expanded is a federal tax board. This is argued for by Alan Blinder in his book "Advice and Dissent: Why America Suffers When Economics and Politics Collide"<ref>https://www.amazon.ca/Advice-Dissent-America-Economics-Politics-ebook/dp/B074DTJBF2</ref>, who proposes that members of the tax board be presidential nominees confirmed by the senate for long terms. He suggests that the board would “design, implement, and maintain a tax system that promotes the long-run growth of the economy with due respect to the goals of fairness, simplicity, and efficiency.” Congress would decide on the values of the board, while the board itself would iron out the details. With this in place, a federal tax board has the potential to significantly streamline the system and help it be more efficient and also perhaps more progressive at the same time.

### Bondholders as a Governmental Branch

In chapter 6 of his book "10% Less Democracy: Why you Should Trust Elites a Little More and the Masses a Little Less", Garrett Jones argues that bondholders have unique insights into the governance of countries, which means that they should have a much more formalized role<ref>10% Less Democracy: Why you Should Trust Elites a Little More and the Masses a Little Less - Chapter 6</ref>. Investors who purchase a nation's debt have a strong interest in the financial stability of a country. This is because they need a country to be financially stable in order to be repaid for their investment. While democracies are known for not focusing on the future, investors are by their very nature extremely concerned with the future of what they're investing in. Because global investors are generally detached from the country they are investing in, they generally have a detached view of what are good ideas and policies for the government to implement.

Governments have an active incentive to ensure that bondholders are happy. This incentive is so strong that governments will even repay most of what they owe to bondholders when times turn grim. The average nation that defaults on its debt, through telling bondholders that they aren’t going to pay back the promised amount, still ends up paying about 2/3rds of what they owe on average. This is because it doesn’t want to ruin its reputation, preventing it from borrowing in the future. This means that present and future bondholders are already significantly shaping government policy<ref>10% Less Democracy: Why you Should Trust Elites a Little More and the Masses a Little Less - Chapter 6</ref>.

The big challenge however is that governments do not have perfect information of what bondholders want from a state to know that it is worthy to invest in. Formalization of a bondholder government branch would help address this issue, as sovereign bondholders do not have any avenue to explicitly tell governments why they chose to invest or not to invest in their country. Rather than be considered sovereign bondholders, investors should be considered sovereign shareholders, and Jones points out that this will have more importance as time goes on. Due to aging populations, government debts are likely to increase as a percent of GDP in many countries. This has the potential to lead to an era of difficult financial choices, and bondholders having governmental influence could help countries navigate those difficulties<ref>10% Less Democracy: Why you Should Trust Elites a Little More and the Masses a Little Less - Chapter 6</ref>.

In a sense, power is zero-sum. The more influence that undemocratic elements of governance have, the less that the average voter has. As such, the introduction of bondholders as a separate branch of government would be an undemocratic move. However, there is a strong argument to be made that it would ultimately improve the financial and economic conditions of countries which implemented it.

### Epistocratic Decision-Making

An epistocracy refers to a system of government that is ruled by people who are the most intelligent<ref>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Epistemic_democracy#Epistocracy</ref>. This takes the form of a government where only a select few educated people are able to vote on government affairs. One potential example of this would be a case where there is universal suffrage for a "lower house" and head of state, while there is suffrage based on education for an "upper house", dividing the government in a way which ensures that everyone has the opportunity to vote, but the most educated are more influential<ref>10% Less Democracy: Why you Should Trust Elites a Little More and the Masses a Little Less - Chapter 5</ref>. Another idea would be to weigh votes differently depending on characteristics such as political knowledge.

To some degree, most industrialized states today are epistocratic in their decision-making. It's well-established that on average, more educated people are more likely to vote. This biases policies in favor of what those who are more educated believe. Some countries today already go farther. While many countries already have voting restrictions based on age or felony status, on the basis that such traits may be a proxy for knowledge/experience and moral character respectively, some countries in Europe go farther and effectively enforce mental competence tests. While controversial, these countries bar many individuals with intellectual disabilities from voting<ref>10% Less Democracy: Why you Should Trust Elites a Little More and the Masses a Little Less - Chapter 5</ref>.

On average, more educated voters bring more information and intelligence into the voting booth. If only those with a high school diploma would vote, public opinion polling suggests that voters would tend to know more about what the government is doing, and are more likely to have facts in mind rather than believe urban legends and conspiracy theories. Conspiracy belief tends to be correlated with a feeling of powerlessness and a belief that most of life’s big problems have simple solutions. Education is negatively related to these two things. People with more education tend to think that life’s problems are harder to solve, and they feel more in control of their lives. As such, having an education requirement for voting would potentially significantly improve the quality of governmental decision-making.



- Futarchy/betting prediction markets
- Sortition



## ======================================== TO INCORPORATE BELOW ========================================

- To some degree non-democracy is inevitable (iron law of oligarchy
- Iron law of oligarchy explains why rent-seeking behavior can happen and why small, focused minorities can consistently get their way, mucking up political and economic systems and making them inefficient.

- *LOOK INTO CANADA VS US SYSTEM AND WHICH IS BETTER

- Maybe have a subsection looking at research on how democratically responsive governments actually are

## <span style="background-color:orange">Public Opinion and Political Change</span>

The impact of public opinion on public policy is substantial, and salience of issues enhances the impact. This impact remains strong even when the activities of political organizations and elites are taken into account<ref>https://www.jstor.org/stable/3219881#metadata_info_tab_contents</ref><ref>https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/american-political-science-review/article/abs/effects-of-public-opinion-on-policy/856B172A7DC19A7EB72C569A7F6F2104</ref>. Policy also drives public opinion, as the public naturally responds positively or negatively to policy changes by the government<ref>https://oxfordre.com/politics/view/10.1093/acrefore/9780190228637.001.0001/acrefore-9780190228637-e-74</ref>.

## <span style="background-color:orange">Journalists</span>

Journalists generally prefer parties with more left-wing positions<ref>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/353756955_The_Left-liberal_Skew_of_Western_Media</ref>.

Americans’ trust in media is currently very low<ref>https://news.gallup.com/poll/651977/americans-trust-media-remains-trend-low.aspx</ref>.

## <span style="background-color:yellow">Politics: The Woman Question</span>

Women perform just as well when they run for public office, but there is a gender gap in political ambition. This is due to a combination of women being less likely to be encouraged or recruited for office, and that public office careers have traits which women tend to find undesirable<ref>https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/05_women_lawless_fox.pdf</ref><ref>https://www.american.edu/spa/wpi/upload/2012-men-rule-report-web.pdf</ref>.

I am generally for a gender quota in political office, to help increase representation of women to be more proportional to men than is the case currently in most if not all political offices. Quotas have neutral to positive effects on the quality of politicians, and they normalize women getting into politics.

Gender quotas can take several forms. They can be reserved seats in political office, they can be quotas for candidates on ballots, or they can be voluntary quotas for candidates in political parties<ref>https://www.idea.int/data-tools/data/gender-quotas/quotas</ref>.

These quotas increase the representation of women within politics<ref>https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.3162/036298009787500330</ref>.

Under such quota systems, the experience and decision-making ability of the candidates, primarily in terms of education, is the same if not better. This is because mediocre male politicians are pushed out of offices as a result of quotas<ref>https://academic.oup.com/book/6058/chapter/149497081</ref><ref>https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/politics-and-gender/article/second-among-unequals-a-study-of-whether-frances-quota-women-are-up-to-the-job/91FA7B3D678ECBAC5472C8C58E650BA6</ref><ref>https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.20160080</ref><ref>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0047272714001480</ref>.

Gender quotas help to normalize women in politics, having a cultural effect separate from the policy itself, helping to get more women into office through increasing the interest of potential female candidates and increasing the number of people who vote for female candidates<ref>https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/124/4/1497/1917190</ref>.

Female legislators tend to place higher emphasis on women's issues and children/family concerns, but also on general economic and health issues. They are more likely to cause increases in government expenditures towards public health and decreases in government expenditures towards military and other areas<ref>https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/j.1540-5907.2006.00202.x</ref><ref>http://uu.diva-portal.org/smash/get/diva2:1246248/FULLTEXT01</ref>.

A matriarchy is a social system in which the mother or a female elder has absolute authority over the family group, and by extension, one or more women exert a similar level of authority over the community as a whole. Under this definition, matriarchal societies have never existed<ref>https://www.britannica.com/topic/matriarchy</ref>. Dube & Harish (2017) looked at the effect of female rule on war among European polities between the 15th and 20th centuries. They found that polities led by queens are more likely to engage in war than polities led by kings<ref>https://www.nber.org/papers/w23337</ref>.

## References

<references />
