---
layout: page
title: Epistemology
permalink: /epistemology/
---

**Summary**

This page is an overview of epistemology, or the study of knowledge. Epistemology is important as insofar as we care about the effects of policies, social arrangements, etc., we need to have a strong means by which we can determine what is true. This page discusses scientific and statistical reasoning, which are crucial towards this process. It also delves into more specific issues, such as the validity of appeals to authority, as well as various issues surrounding causal inference, where there is extensive disagreement and debate. Epistemology is an extremely underappreciated area of inquiry which is crucial for having a strong and coherent understanding of the world, and hence a strong and coherent set of political beliefs.

## What is Epistemology, and Why is it Important?

Epistemology refers to a branch of philosophy which studies knowledge. It generally deals with more meta-level questions, such as what knowledge is and what the sources of knowledge are. This page will not deal with extremely foundational questions, such as definining knowledge or whether any beliefs are truly justified. While these are interesting questions, they are not particularly important for understanding political theory or the social sciences in general. Rather, this page will be dedicated to addressing how to understand what is true or false in a general social scientific context.

It is first important to discuss the "is-ought distinction". "Is" claims, also often referred to as "positive" or "descriptive" claims, refer to claims about how the world is. For example, a descriptive claim might be "you are reading this sentence". It may be true, or it may be false, and it refers to something about reality. On the other hand, "ought" claims, also often referred to as "normative" claims, refer to claims about how the world ought to be. For example, a descriptive claim might be "you should be reading this sentence". Such a claim cannot be true or false in the same way that a descriptive claim is, as it addresses values as opposed to claiming something about reality.

This is not to say that there is no way in which descriptive and normative claims could be linked with one another. Take the sentence "the book 'The Great Gatsby' by F. Scott Fitzgerald is a good book". What does it mean for a book to be "good"? There is certainly some level of subjectivity to it, as some people may enjoy the book while others may not. However, every person's judgement of whether "The Great Gatsby" is a good book would imply an underlying value structure according to which books can be seen as "good" or "not good", even if not explicitly articulated or understood, as well as an assessment over how "The Great Gatsby" stacks up according to that value structure. The value structure is necessarily normative in nature, as it isn't something which "exists" in reality in the same way that a physical object does. However, given the value structure, assessing whether the book holds up to it is a descriptive claim, as it assesses the descriptive contents of the book itself. Thus, normative claims, when being evaluated, often require an assessment of both descriptive and normative claims.

Epistemology is the foundational means by which people can assess whether descriptive claims are true, and it is important in that it allows us to act in the world and benefit from our actions. Every person develops a form of epistemology, each of which has differential effects on how a person would interpret and engage with the world. The stages of development as outlined by Jean Piaget's theory of cognitive development are indicative of how different epistemologies can have a siginificant impact on the way that a person can engage with the world, leaving aside criticisms of the theory, such as the assumption of a smooth, universal, and predictable path of development for children<ref>https://www.verywellmind.com/support-and-criticism-of-piagets-stage-theory-2795460</ref>. For example, the first stage as identified by Piaget, the sensorimotor stage which occurs at around the ages of 0 and 2, suggests that people do not innately have a sense of object permanence<ref>https://www.verywellmind.com/piagets-stages-of-cognitive-development-2795457</ref>. Object permanence refers to the notion that an object continues to exist even when it is not being directly observed. This is not necessarily a problem for infants, who are continously being supervised and cared for by adults, have a set of innate reflexes and responses that are adaptive for their period of development, and lack any strong motor skills which could put them at high risk of hurting themselves. However, an adult person without object permanence would struggle significantly with navigating things in their day-to-day life. As a simple example, they would be at much greater risk of tripping over objects, as they would assume that the object disappeared the second that they looked away from it. A person's epistemology is thus foundational to how they survive and engage in activities.

This is a relatively abstract and foundational example, but all of this is extremely relevant in the context of the social sciences. Many claims about policy rest in part upon empirical claims about what is the case. For example, take the claim "we should set the United States' national minimum wage to $15 an hour". This claim is often justified upon a basis that it would improve the well-being of those who would work minimum wage jobs. There can be debate about whether that is a value worth striving for, but assuming that it is, the question then becomes to what extent a $15/hour minimum wage actually improves the well-being of workers. If the minimum wage rate significantly reduces employment in sectors affected, then this might on net harm those who would work minimum wage jobs, as many of them become unemployed as a consequence of the policy change.

Many claims which revolve around humanities subjects, and deal with what ought to be the case, depend heavily on what is the case descriptively speaking. This is not to say that moral philosophy isn't relevant or doesn't play an important role in policy discussions, but policy discussions cannot be reduced to moralizing. In order to understand what is the case, especially in contentious or ambiguous situations as the social sciences often are, it is crucial to have a strong epistemology. This involves coming up with ways to answer questions about what is the case descriptively.

People are quite malleable in their views about political subjects. Despite political orientation having a substantial genetic component to it (see [Are Beliefs Genetic?](https://prometheandissident.github.io/psychology/#are-beliefs-genetic?)), people's political beliefs change all of the time. On political subjects where the truth is ambiguous, people are more likely to resort to mental heuristics, and it can be signficantly easier to get people to believe particular things with the correct priming and guiding of intuition. Depending on how it is framed, practically any set of descriptive claims an ideology professes can be made to seem intuitively true. A strong epistemology helps defend oneself against this extreme malleability, and ensure that when one's beliefs are changed, it is in accordance with the revelation of new information or ideas as opposed to an arbitrary sway towards a set of ideas that was merely sold better.

## On Scientific Reasoning

Science refers to a systematic process by which knowledge about the world is acquired. At its core is the "scientific method" which involves the continuous formation and testing of various hypotheses. This method is foundational to how information about areas such as chemistry and physics is acquired. However, its applicability in the context of politics and to claims about humans is often contested. Science is often split into the "hard sciences" and the "soft sciences", with the hard sciences including chemistry and physics and the soft sciences including areas such as sociology and economics, with biology somewhere in between.

Some argue that humans cannot be scientifically studied, and thus there can be no such thing as the "social sciences". There is no good reason why humans are excempt from this process. Contrary to what many might believe, human action is not completely random, and can be explained and even predicted by an understanding of the biological processes that underpin it (see [On Biological Determinism](https://prometheandissident.github.io/psychology/#on-biological-determinism)). Humans are made up of physical matter which adheres to the same laws of physics as matter which humans are not comprised of, and there is no evidence to suggest that there is any external thing interfacing with humans to determine their behavior outside of the physical matter that makes up people. There is no "ghost in the machine". Rather, human behavior is a complex interaction of chemicals and particles interfacing between the brain, the human's other physical parts, and its broader environment.

Certainly, human behavior is much more complex and difficult to predict than, for example, aspects of physics. However, the fact that it is complex and difficult to predict does not mean that scientific principles cannot in theory be applied, only that their application would present greater difficulty. This greater difficulty, combined with a general funnelling of quantitatively-minded people into the hard sciences<ref>https://source.oglethorpe.edu/2013/07/29/philosophy-dominates-in-best-majors-for-gre-scores-physics-central-buzz-blog/</ref>, means that it is common for intellectuals in the social sciences to shunt any actual attempt to test hypotheses about social phenomena. This is something which will need to be addressed in the future, and is something which economics has begun to address with the rise of the "credibility revolution"<ref>https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/jep.24.2.3</ref>, something which has unfortunately not translated into other social science fields such as sociology<ref>https://statsandsociety.substack.com/p/the-credibility-revolution-is-passing</ref>.

In the absence of this, there is a turn towards verbal and anti-quantitative scholarship which becomes difficult to verify or disprove. This general lack of intellectual rigor allows for explicitly activist disciplines to enter the domain of the social sciences or humanities, such as "critical race studies" or related disciplines<ref>https://www.insidehighered.com/opinion/columns/higher-ed-gamma/2024/04/01/activist-academy</ref>. These disciplines abdicate any attempt to create a rigorous epistemology in favor of bending facts to their own normative desires, generally following some contrived notion of "liberation". One could argue that based on this general lack of rigor in what would traditionally be described as the "social sciences" that these disciplines are not "scientific". I would follow a more inclusive definition of science where despite severe issues, such disciplines would still be classified as scientific. This is because they can still engage in some degree of hypothesis testing and revision, even if it is done in a poor or disingenuous way. However, even if these disciplines in their current state could not be labelled as scientific, this does not mean that having a "social science" is impossible. In reality, with present methods, it is possible, and many pieces of research are engaging in scientific inquiry across social science disciplines, leaving aside differences in commonality and rigor across such disciplines. Thus, there is such thing as the social sciences.

One way in which many attempt to distinguish what is scientific versus what is non-scientific is through examining whether the discipline exhibits falsifiability. Developed by the 20th century philosopher Karl Popper, the "criterion of falsifiability" refers to the notion that a theory is only scientific if it is in theory possible to establish that it is false<ref>https://www.britannica.com/topic/criterion-of-falsifiability</ref>. Popper used this criterion to argue that many theories such as Marxism, which itself claims to be scientific, were in reality non-scientific in nature. I certainly think that Marxism has flaws and deservedly fell as a result of its intellectual problems (see [The Fall of Marxism](https://prometheandissident.github.io/economics/#the-fall-of-marxism)). However, Popper's criterion of falsifiability is not a particularly good way to solve the problem of demarcating scientific versus non-scientific theories.

The Duhem-Quine thesis demonstrates why. It states that it is impossible to definitely falsify a scientific hypothesis, because any empirical test of a hypothesis depends on multiple background (or auxiliary) hypotheses which cannot be tested in isolation<ref>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Duhem%E2%80%93Quine_thesis</ref>. As a result, the criterion of falsifiability cannot function as a meaningful demarcation of scientific theories versus non-scientific theories. For example, in his time, Galileo Galilei used the newly invented telescope to observe stars and planets, coming to a number of conclusions about the cosmos, including that the earth revolved around the sun, not the other way around. This was met with skepticism by many, and some philosophers went as far as to argue that the telescope may have introduced artefacts that led to illusions, undermining Galileo's claims. In reality, an infinite number of rebuttals to any empirical finding can be formulated, including an empirical finding which claims to falsify a particular theory. As such, through an infinite reinterpretation of facts, practically any theory can be rendered non-falsifiable.

Karl Popper himself eventually conceded this fact<ref>https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/popper/#CritEval</ref>, and asserted that it is impossible to discriminate between scientific versus non-scientific theories on the basis of falsification alone. Readjustment of auxiliary hypotheses is natural and integral to the sciences, and is not necessarily done in a dishonest manner. It thus cannot be discounted as a valid way to reinterpret empirical findings which may have been previously claimed to falsify a theory. He attempted to outline conditions for whether a modification of auxiliary hypotheses itself was genuinely scientific, or whether it was ad hoc (invented for preserving a belief/theory for its own sake). Popper later asserted that Marxism was not unscientific because it was unfalsifiable, but because its advocates preserved it from falsificationism through ad hoc modification of auxiliary hypotheses. How the adjustment of auxiliary hypotheses can be assessed to be scientific or ad hoc opens up a new problem, and there appears to be no clear solution to it.

What is ultimately demonstrated with the Duhem-Quine thesis however is that science cannot be reducible to raw empiricism. Every piece of information can only be interpreted through presupposing a certain set of auxiliary hypotheses, some of which are inevitably not directly challenged by the observation itself. This can be understood as having a theoretical framework, regardless of whether it is explicitly or implicitly articulated as such. Theory can be challenged by empirical evidence and how it's interpreted, and empirical evidence and how it's intepreted can be challenged by theory. It is not a one-sided process as Popperian falsificationism would suggest that it is.

While falsificationism is not a good way to engage with science, as it becomes functionally meaningless, I hold that parsimony or Occam's razor is one strong heuristic for scientific reasoning. Occam's razor is a principle coined by the 14th century philosopher William of Ockham, which states that when comparing two competing theories, the simplest explanation is to be preferred<ref>https://www.britannica.com/topic/Occams-razor</ref>. It suggests that the theory with the fewest number of assumptions is to be preferred over and above a set of competing explanations. This helps to counter the problem of any information falsifying a theory being ad hoc reinterpreted through the introduction of new auxiliary hypotheses, as any large number of new auxiliary hypotheses can be dismissed through the use of Occam's razor.

Importantly, Occam's razor shouldn't be misused to suggest that more simple theories are necessarily better than more complex theories. The theories have to have some level of explanatory power to them, and if a theory doesn't, then no matter how simple it is, it is not a useful theory. However, Occam's razor can be effectively employed when comparing two theories of equal or roughly equal explanatory power. In this case, the simpler theory should take prevedence. This notion can be justified mathematically speaking using probability theory<ref>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Occam%27s_razor#Mathematical</ref>. All assumptions by definition create a possibility for error or incorrectness. Thus, if the introduction of a new assumption does not improve the accuracy of a theory, its net effect is only to increase the probability that the overall theory is wrong.

Occam's razor can be invaluable in addressing the problem of determining whether auxiliary hypotheses are ad hoc in nature. If one were to point to several independent lines of evidence in favor of one theory, in the case where lines of evidence are dismissed through ad hoc introduction of auxiliary hypotheses, these will generally differ in explaining each individual line of evidence. Occam's razor or the principle of parsimony will generally rule in favor of the theory, as one explanation for a set of phenomena is more parsimonious than multiple explanations for multiple sets of phenomena. The use of this strategy can also be beneficial as it increases the probability that a person begins engaging in [kettle logic](https://prometheandissident.github.io/epistemic-progressivism-supplement/#kettle-logic) to try and tear down each line of evidence, after which you can be consident that the explanations are ad hoc.

### The Validity of Appeals to Authority

Other than perhaps the "slippery slope", there is no style of argumentation which has as much heated disagreement about as the "appeal to authority". To quote from a website on fallacies, an appeal to authority is a style of argument which involves _"insisting that a claim is true simply because a valid authority or expert on the issue said it was true, without any other supporting evidence offered"_<ref>https://www.logicallyfallacious.com/logicalfallacies/Appeal-to-Authority</ref>.

It is certainly the case that the truth of a given proposition is not premised upon the credentials of the individual saying it. For example, whether or not evolution is true is not premised upon whether an expert on the subject says it's true. It is possible for evolution to be true despite an expert on the subject saying it's not true, and vice versa. There are plenty of instances throughout history where a set of or even the majority of experts have been incorrect on a subject. After all, the majority of experts on the natural world rejected evolution prior to the the invention of the theory, by virtue of no one having thought about it, and the theory was not widely accepted until long after it was first proposed. Either most experts on the natural world were wrong before Darwinian evolution became the majority view, or they are wrong now. Experts can and have been wrong at many times.

This certainly means that an appeal to authority cannot be used to definitely say that something is true, but can it still be used to argue that something is probably true? In reality, virtually everything that people do relies upon trust of other individuals, including experts in many cases. For example, for any medication one takes, there is necessarily a trust of experts at some point down. Most people take the word of doctors or things they see online, curated by experts, on information regarding the effects and efficacy of certain medications. Some who are more careful go through particular studies, but even this requires one to trust the experts writing the studies. This is merely one example. In practically all areas of life, if one takes a close enough look, there has to be trust in the efficacy of experts or certain institutions that they have done their job and are reporting on things truthfully. Otherwise, one cannot function in society.

There are areas where I believe that the majority or at least large numbers of experts are wrong about issues. This website is devoted to discussing ideas in areas from psychology to sociology where I think that majority views or at least views held by a substantial number of experts have often been incorrect. My view is that less trust should be placed in expertise that has been shown to be biased by moralization or politicization of disciplines. As such, there should be a skepticism of many of the claims that are put forward by experts when it comes to political issues. In many cases, experts will tell "noble lies" because they feel that they could be beneficial to society, whether or not they actually are. Nonetheless, any serious attempt to engage with appeals to authority should recognize that while experts can be wrong and are wrong in many cases, they are still in many cases better than average joes<ref>https://ncofnas.com/p/podcast-bros-and-brain-rot</ref> (see [The Validity of Experts](https://prometheandissident.github.io/academia/#the-validity-of-experts)). The same can be said about the media, which can be dishonest, but is still overall good in its reporting<ref>https://www.richardhanania.com/p/why-the-media-is-honest-and-good</ref>.

Whenever I take a view which goes against some common view of experts, I tend to rely heavily upon experts indirectly. This is because I am usually citing data and studies, often from people I disagree with on many other issues, and showing how the preponderance of evidence that experts put out actually may disagree with what the experts really think. A serious attempt to argue against a majority expert view must have a thoughtful and proper engagement with the literature on that subject. Otherwise, it will struggle to make any strong arguments against said view.

Ultimately, appeals to authority are inductive arguments. It is simply a rough proxy for when something may be true, in the absence of further investigation. I think that appeals to authority are good arguments on non-political topics, and while being worse on political topics, can still be informative. However, more caution should be taken, and on political topics, we should not have the same level of deference towards experts.

## On Statistical reasoning

In engaging in scientific analysis, statistics is crucial. As discussed in [What is Epistemology, and Why is it Important?](https://prometheandissident.github.io/epistemology/#what-is-epistemology,-and-why-is-it-important?), people's political beliefs are quite easily malleable, as one can easily make an intuitive argument in favor of any set of political beliefs. The ability to use language to obscure issues, and intuitively argue in favor of any set of beliefs, is why philosophy has been around for thousands of years and yet has arguably made very little progress in that period of time<ref>https://www.leonvoss.com/p/why-philosophy-is-invalid</ref>. Meanwhile, empirical research has made significant strides in only a few decades on a wide range of subjects.

Statistical reasoning is the attempt to interpret and analyze data, which allows us to understand the world in terms of aggregates rather than individual instances. This helps to give us expectations for what the effect of something is going to be. Many arguments about a particular policy will point to one instance of the policy being implemented and look at its effects in one specific instance. This is like pointing to an individual battle in a historical event and using that to make a point about the outcome of the war. While individual battles can be informative, the outcome of the war is more important than individual battles. Data helps to aggregate the effects of one policy over a wide range of people, and answer related questions in a similar fashion. Anecdotes can be used, but data is a significantly stronger piece of evidence to use whenever assessing any empirical claim.

### Causal Inference

While the distinction between correlation and causation has been made to death, it is worth repeating. Correlation refers to whether two variables tend to go in the same direction. On the other hand, causation refers to whether one variable explains the change in another variable. Correlation is much easier to empirically establish than causation, as causality requires both correlation and that one variable was affected by the other. Correlation between two variables on its own cannot establish whether one variable caused another, as it is possible that variable A caused variable B, variable B caused variable A, both variables caused one another (ex. chicken and egg problems), or a third variable caused both. Further complicating this is that correlations can merely be produced due to error in a sample, rather than because there is an actual relationship between two variables in reality. This is generally addressed through looking at the statistical significance of a relationship, or in other words, examining how likely it is that a particular finding was established through mere chance in data noise.

Causality is very difficult to establish in the social sciences. The best way to assess causality when it comes to humans is to use experiments, which are common in medicine and some parts of psychology. These involve randomly assigning people to a "treatment group" or a "control group", with the only relevant systematic difference between the two groups being whether the group has received a certain treatment. This alllows us to establish causal effects of things, but it is limited in its use. You can't do this with economies or very large groups of people, as that would be extremely expensive and disruptive. Furthermore, there are many ethical restrictions on experiments which mean that even when the method can be performed in theory, in practice it would never be allowed to be done. In the absence of purely experimental settings, it is difficult or impossible to know for sure whether a "treatment group" or "control group" for a study, or whatever their technical analogues are, are really identical in everything except for having a particular treatment. This makes precise estimation of causal effects extremely difficult in areas such as economics or sociology.

Luckily, the aforementioned credibility revolution, which has taken economics by storm, has been very helpful in devising methods to establish causality in the absence of experiments and randomized control trials. Perhaps the strongest of these have been natural experiments, which were utilized as early at the mid-19th century, but have been popularized and methodologically formalized in the 1980s<ref>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Natural_experiment</ref>. Natural experiments look at real-world cases where individuals are in effect split into control and experimental groups, where the treatment is exogenous, and examines the differential changes in outcomes between the individuals, utilizing a statistical method known as "difference in differences"<ref>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Difference_in_differences</ref>. These types of research designs allow for people to study much more macro-level phenomena which could not be studied in a true experimental study, while nonetheless remaining confident that the true effect size/causal relationship is established. Other methods which have gained widespread popularity due to their ability to ascertain causality to a strong degree include instrumental variables design<ref>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Instrumental_variable</ref> and regression discontinuity design<ref>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Regression_discontinuity_design</ref>. These three methods are perhaps the most rigorous observational study designs which allow causality to be ascertained in conditions where a true experiment cannot be devised.

#### Ranges of Reaction

One of the most important things to recognize about effects is that they must always be interpreted as existing within a particular range of reaction. A simple example of this can be seen with the famous minimum wage debate. One of the largest debates between economists on the minimum wage is what effect it has on unemployment, and there has been an explosion of econometric research designed to empirically assess this question. Every study will look at one or more changes in the minimum wage and attempt to determine their effect on unemployment. Suppose one study looked at a change in a state's minimum wage that was from $14.00/hour to $15.00/hour, and found no net effect. It would be reasonable to suggest that other changes in the minimum wage of a similar magnitude and with similar starting and end points would have similar effect (or absence of effects). However, this says little about whether a change in a minimum wage from $15.00/hour to $40.00/hour would have no effect on unemployment. If every study only looks at small changes in the minimum wage with low starting and end points, none of them would provide much information on whether a drastic change to an especially high minimum wage would have a significant effect on unemployment. All studies are done within a particular context and range of reaction (for a more extensive discussion on the empirics of the minimum wage, see [Minimum Wage](https://prometheandissident.github.io/economics/#minimum-wage)).

#### Statistical and Practical Significance

An important distinction must be made between statistical and practical significance. Statistical significance refers to whether it is reasonable to reject the null hypothesis in a statistical analysis. In other words, it refers to whether there is an effect in one direction that is unlikely to be due to chance. Conversely, practical significance refers to whether an effect is large enough to be considered meaningful. These two can often be conflated in research findings, and while they are often correlated with one another, it is possible to have findings which are one but not the other.

In general, practical significance is more important to look at, as it indicates whether the expected effect of something is likely to actually be meaningful and worth consideration. However, in the absence of statistical significance, the effect found, even if practically significant, will have an extremely high variance, and in reality may actually be null. Another aspect of significance which can be worth consideration, particularly in meta-analyses where practical significance can be hard to establish even when statistical signficance can, is "relative significance", or the R^2 value. The R^2 value refers to what percentage of the variance in an outcome variable can be explained by the explanatory variable. If the R^2 value is low, it can mean that the explanatory variable is not particularly important. However, this is nonetheless contingent upon a given range of reaction (see [Ranges of Reaction](https://prometheandissident.github.io/epistemology/#ranges-of-reaction)), so care must be taken in its interpretation.

#### On the Use of Control Variables

In many cases, experimental or quasi-experimental settings cannot be established in a study. This means that a study will merely have to be correlational in nature, which means that all findings must be interpreted with care. One issue which often comes up is confounding variables. These refer to situations where an exogenous variable affects both the dependent and independent variable in a study. If not controlled for, this can bias findings and mean that any effect size given does not reflect the true relationship between the two variables in question.

Many people who are new to statistical analysis or don't understand the basics may be quick to add a bunch of control variables when doing any analysis. This is wrongheaded. There needs to be a strong theoretical reason for why particular controls are included, as the inclusion of controls can often lead to misleading or incorrect results. Controls require causal theories<ref>https://www.cremieux.xyz/p/you-cant-just-control-for-things</ref>. Suppose that we are trying to look at the effect of X on Y, and we are considering controlling for C, which is correlated with both X and Y. It could be the case that C causes both X and Y, in which case it is a "confounder", and we should control for C. However, suppose that X causes C, and both C and X independently cause Y. In this case, C is a "mediator", and controlling for it would not capture the full range of effects that X can have on Y, as there is a direct effect of X on Y and an indirect effect through X's effect on C which affects Y. Here, controlling for C would lead to misleading results. Similarly, suppose that X and Y both cause C. In this case, C is a "collider", and its correlations with X and Y do not meaningfully make for a confounding relationship. Thus, C should not be controlled for. It is only when there is a strong theoretical reason to believe that C causes X and Y that it should be controlled for.

One area where bad controls commonly pop up takes the form of the [Sociologist's Fallacy](https://prometheandissident.github.io/epistemic-progressivism-supplement/#sociologist%E2%80%99s-fallacy). A common example of this is the assumption that intelligence is caused by socioeconomics because income is correlated with intelligence, when it could be the case that those with high intelligence tend to be wealthier and pass their genes down to their offspring who now have both a genetically high IQ and a high parental socioeconomic status. In reality, there is most likely bidirectional causality at play in these types of relationships (see [The Predictive Validity of Intelligence](https://prometheandissident.github.io/psychology/#the-predictive-validity-of-intelligence)).

## Value Structures in Reasoning

When it comes to analyzing a particular issue, the questions one is interested in will necessarily be dependent on one's value structure. For example, empirical research on the laffer curve, or the relationship between the tax rate versus the tax revenue, might be valuable to someone who wants to maximize tax revenue, or someone who is interested in balancing tax revenue with economic growth. However, if one views taxation as intrinsically immoral in a deontlogical manner, the laffer curve will be unimportant to them.

Because the questions we ask are dependent on value structures and are derived from preferences, we can say that the questions asked are not objective. However, this does not mean that the answers or information we derive from trying to answer those questions are themselves also not objective. The opposite is true. In short, the questions we ask are subjective, while the answers we receive are objective. This is an instance where the is-ought distinction must be kept in mind. Depending on what "ought" claims we make about the world, this can affect what "is" issues we are interested in.

## References

<references />
