---
layout: page
title: Free Speech
permalink: /free-speech/
---

This page overviews the philosophy of freedom of speech: why it is important, and what is means to uphold it. Freedom of speech is crucial as it promotes the evolution of knowledge and rationality on a social level. The protection of freedom of speech is not merely limited to laws, but also must be cultural in nature. Beyond legal threats, freedom of speech in a substantive sense, as a means to knowledge and rationality, can be threatened by corporations, academia, individuals, and the general public. This is because free speech is a means to an end, a means by which knowledge and rationality are promoted. When private entities or cultural values undermine this means, even if they do so through speech, they undermine freedom of speech in effect. In promoting this substantive understanding of freedom of speech, I argue in favor of the right to invoke the paradox of tolerance against censoriousness in certain contexts, and the necessity of pluralism in forming communities with different norms and customs. Freedom of speech is the lifeblood of social evolution, and it is crucial that we treat it with the importance that it deserves.

## On the Importance of Freedom of Speech

Many view freedom of speech as a good merely because it gives people freedom to say things which do not directly harm others. If speech cannot directly harm others, it should be protected. While this view, which holds that something can only be restricted if it's demonstrated to harm others, is a reasonable view to have, it does not truly grasp the significance of freedom of speech. It merely reduces free speech to "the ability to do stuff", without considering what is so positive about freedom of speech.

Freedom of speech is a positive for the same reason that evolution is a positive. Where evolution allows organisms to better adapt to their environments over time, maximizing survival, freedom of speech allows ideas to be exchanged, which can lead to society evolving and improving over time in a similar manner. The ability to speak ideas is a prerequisite to societal evolution, as in order for society to change in an explicit manner there must be the ability for people to explicitly describe and argue in favor of that change. Societies which severely restrict freedom of speech, only allowing views which are already in the status quo, will struggle to advance in any meaningful way. Freedom of speech allows people to generate ideas, test them, and adopt or reject them based on whether they survive argumentation. It allows curiosity and discovery to be freely engaged in. It is thus not surprising that greater freedom of speech is associated with higher innovation<ref>http://justitia-int.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/Analyse_Ytringsfrihed-Hvad-skal-det-nytte.pdf</ref>.

Similarly, freedom of speech allows people to express problems in a non-violent manner. In a sense, it civilizes people. This is because the absence of freedom of speech means that people no longer feel like they are able to discuss their problems or grievances in society, and so people will resort to forms of overt coersion to have their grievances heard. This can manifest in forms of violence or terrorism. It is not a surprise that the viewpoints which are oftentimes associated with higher rates of violence are those outside the mainstream. While some of these worldviews can be inherently violence-promoting, it is also the case that feeling like you can't express yourself in public without fear of ostracism can drive one towards violence. Freedom of speech allows grievances to be discussed, negotiated, and incorporated into society in a peaceful manner. This is backed up empirically. Eskildsen & Bjørnskov (2020) looked at a panel of 162 countries between 1970-2016 and found that discussion freedom is unambiguously associated with less terrorism in democracies<ref>https://futurefreespeech.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/Freedom-of-Expression-and-Terror-Apr-4.pdf</ref>. Another study suggested that there is no connection between the protection of freedom of expression and radicalization and terror<ref>http://justitia-int.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/Analyse_Ytringsfrihed-Hvad-skal-det-nytte.pdf</ref>.

Freedom of speech, like any other right, requires both enforcement by the state as well as a general cultural infrastructure which upholds the right. Freedom of speech doesn't exist substantively if the state actively prohibits it and suppresses anyone who engages in speech. Even if a person has the literal freedom to speak, in that they are not immediately physically prevented from speaking, the coersion of knowing that one will be punished for doing so means that freedom of speech does not exist in any substantive way. Similarly, freedom of speech doesn't exist substantively if the broader culture doesn't support it. If through exercising freedom of speech one puts themselves at high risk of social ostracism, loss of employment, and general impoverishment, the coersion of knowing that one will be punished for freedom of speech means that is does not substantively exist, even if there is no state apparatus actively suppressing free speech. Thus, it is crucial that not only the state generally protect freedom of speech, but the general population must also recognize its importance and not prevent it from substantively existing.

Rights come with responsibilities. The right to freedom of speech, the right to the benefits it provides to society, also requires a responsibility for people to engage in it fruitfully. While freedom of speech can be used for immense positive developments and promote rationality, it can also be used to promote irrationality and other harmful things if abused. In extreme cases, it can lead to violence or oppression in a direct or indirect manner. For responsible use of free speech to be promoted and supercede irresponsible uses, a culture around freedom of speech and broader discourse must come with the protection of such a right by the state. Perhaps the best sets of broad norms for discourse was compiled by Kenneth Westhues, who took ideas from Alastair Roberts and Steve Sailer, referred to as modern discourse (see [Mobbing and Other Group Dynamics](https://prometheandissident.github.io/psychology/#mobbing-and-other-group-dynamics) for a more extensive discussion on how this is practiced or not practiced today)<ref>https://www.kwesthues.com/regiftedxmas12.html</ref>:

- Personal detachment from the issues under discussion
- Values on confidence, originality, agonism, independence of thought, creativity, assertiveness, mastery of one’s feelings, a thick skin and high tolerance for your own and others’ discomfort
- Playfulness is legitimate: One can play devil’s advocate, speak tongue in cheek, overstate and use hyperbole, the object being not to capture the truth in a single, balanced monologue, but to expose the strengths and weaknesses of various positions
- Scathing satire and sharp criticism are also legitimate
- The best ideas are thought to emerge from mutual, merciless probing and attacking of arguments
- Participants are repeatedly forced to return to the drawing board and produce better arguments
- The truth is not to be located in a single voice but rather is to emerge from the conversation as a whole

A couple of other values I would add onto these which I would view as important would include sincerity and an absence of contrarianism for the sake of contrarianism. These two are somewhat interrelated. By these, I mean that people should geniunely hold the beliefs they do, and only engage in playfulness for the sake of intellectual progress as opposed to for the sake of trolling. Similarly, contrarianism should not be engaged in for its own sake, but once again should only be engaged in through dialectic processes where a better understanding of something can emerge at the end. These values have been somewhat under threat simply due to the greater amount of time people spend online, which due to its greater anonymity tends to breed these issues. With the internet increasingly being viewed as more important than the real world, these problems can bleed into the real world to an extent that they may not have previously done so. Similarly, civility is an extremely important value to have in dialectic, so long as it doesn't come at the expense of the pursuit of truth. Uncomfortable truths should not be expressed in a manner designed to elicit a response from someone else. Civility has similarly been undermining with the rise of the internet.

With a legal protection of freedom of speech and a broader cultural framework which allows it to be used in an effective manner, free and open dialogue can be used productively. Freedom of speech is one of the most important values any society that wishes to progress should have.

## Threats to Free Speech

Because freedom of speech can be viewed as a positive right which can be violated at both a state level as well as a cultural level, threats to freedom of speech can manifest themselves at a number of levels. I identify four levels of note, which include the state, corporations, academia, and the general public (note that this list draws heavily from T. K. Van Allen's analysis in his article on freedom of speech<ref>https://zerocontradictions.net/pdfs/freedom-of-speech.pdf</ref>). These will be discussed in order:

- **The State -** The most obvious way in which freedom of speech can be violated or suppressed is through the state. The imposition of deliberate restrictions on the ability for people to express certain ideas or talk about certain things under threat of force by the state is perhaps the most egregious way in which freedom of speech can be violated. A less egregious form of violation of freedom of speech which can occur depending on state laws is the suppression of speech through lawfare, as what happened with the anti-immigration website VDARE<ref>https://vdare.com/</ref>. This can occur when dubiously valid legal attacks are consistently levied against an individual or entity, requiring the recipient to continously pay vast sums of money to cover legal funds associated with their defense. Through slowly whittling away at their income and causing impoverishment, lawfare of this form can effectively lead to the suppression of certain voices.
- **Corporations -** Corporations, through engaging in viewpoint discrimination against individuals in hiring processes, or through firing individuals already employed, effectively coercing individuals into silence through economic soft power. Beyond this, there is the threat which corporations pose insofar as they control various platforms and mediums for communication. A particularly important instance of this is with social media, where a large debate over the past decade has surrounded whether deplatforming certain individuals can ever be justified. Social media companies which ban individuals for expressing certain viewpoints can effectively silence certain viewpoints. Beyond the economic effects of deplatforming individuals whose careers are often built on having large online audiences through these platforms, deplatforming can cut off certain viewpoints from being seen in what is currently one of the most fundamental mediums of communication. Because this medium is privatized, this opens up the opportunity for private entities to limit freedom of speech.
- **Academia -** Academia is similar to corporations in that it can engage in viewpoint discrimination in hiring and firing, as well as in more soft means such as promotion for awards. This happens regularly in practice (see [Political Bias in Academia](https://prometheandissident.github.io/academia/#political-bias-in-academia)). What makes academia unique is that unlike corporate jobs which are in many cases held by individuals without strong expertise, or general social media platforms where anyone can talk, is that academia is a type of gatekeeper. Because academia is uniquely associated with prestige, it gatekeeps whose voices are regarded as ones which should be taken seriously. Furthermore, the broader system provides individuals with professional positions where they can conduct research on various topics. It is unique in that it pays individuals for producing knowledge, which is significantly more time-consuming, costly, but also valuable, relative to general dialectic which may be seen on an online platform. Gatekeeping of academia not only gatekeeps legitimacy to a degree, but it also gatekeeps the capacity for individuals to engage in research. In this respect, violations of free speech in academia are worse than corporate violations, as the chilling effects not only affect speech, but also the capacity to produce knowledge.
- **The General Public -** While less talked about today, it has been widely recognized by a number of liberal philosophers, such as John Stuart Mill, Alexis de Tocqueville, Bertrand Russell, that the "tyranny of the majority" can act as a way to stifle free speech in itself<ref>https://necpluribusimpar.net/censorship-is-bad-even-when-its-done-by-private-companies/</ref>. In conjunction with threat of losing platforms, loss of employment in academia and elsewhere, social pressures to conform to societal dogmas can be immense, should such dogmas exist. While anonymity can help alleviate some of these problems, anonymously speaking about controversial subjects publicly inevitably breeds the risk of doxxing, which risks bringing social and economic costs to speech. In extreme cases, individual acts of terrorism or mob violence against individuals can also lead to a dampening on freedom of speech. Risk of violence from private individuals if one speaks out can effectively silence many individuals.

## Freedom of Speech as a Means

The discussion on freedom of speech as it has taken place thus far may appear paradoxical. How can freedom of speech of the general public in the form of mobbing constitute a violation of freedom of speech? It is important to always recognize that freedom of speech is not an end in and of itself. Its value politically is predominantly as a means to an end. Freedom of speech is meant to facilitate rationality through the exchange of knowledge and ideas between individuals<ref>https://zerocontradictions.net/pdfs/freedom-of-speech.pdf</ref>. Anything which actively hinders the facilitation of rationality through stopping speech thus constitutes a violation of freedom of speech, even if it is utilizing speech in the process. Because mobbing, or the "tyranny of the majority", actively hinders rational dialogue, the general public in some cases can actively harm freedom of speech through their own speech.

This is heavily related to Karl Popper's notion of the "paradox of tolerance" - a concept which has been heavily abused and misunderstood in recent decades<ref>https://giggsboson.medium.com/stop-misusing-poppers-paradox-of-tolerence-in-free-speech-debates-6f6ab4b8f0d3</ref>. Karl Popper argued that if intolerance is tolerated, the intolerant will have a greater ability to suppress the tolerant and promote intolerance. In the end, through promoting intolerance, the society becomes intolerant. Thus, if one wishes to truly preserve tolerance, they must be intolerant towards the intolerant. In many left-wing circles, this concept has been used to argue that anyone who disagrees with leftist values must not be tolerated, since non-leftists are "intolerant" of particular groups or lifestyles. However, while Popper was vague and only discussed the paradox briefly, his original intent with the paradox was to conceptualize intolerance in terms of censoriousness, as he argues that we should have the right to be intolerant once an intolerant group refuses to engage in debate. The link between intolerance in terms of censoriousness and the promotion of general suppression of people is much more clear than the link between alleged intolerance of non-leftists, which is why it makes much more sense to utilize the paradox of tolerance primarily against those who are censorious.

In practice, this can mean a number of things. In an academic context, for instance, it can mean being intolerant towards students or faculty who attempt to harass or intimidate other students or faculty for their views, it can mean being intolerant towards individuals who attempt to stop a campus speech through shouting the speaker down or engaging in violence, or it can mean being intolerant towards individuals who attempt to fire a professor for their views. The paradox of tolerance must be invoked first and foremost against censoriousness, as even if it means suppressing some speech in effect, it upholds the value of freedom of speech as a means.

Nonetheless, there is some validity to the idea that some forms of speech, even if not directly censorious, can ultimately undermine the capacity for rational dialogue or other values considered important. A simple example previously brought up is incivility. When people are needlessly uncivil in dialogue, this can push out voices and undermine rational discourse. Other examples can include violations of "modern discourse", such as when there is a deliberate attempt to attach particular interlocutors into a discussion. While it is the case that the personal is political to a degree, and that the identity characteristics of a person can oftentimes help explain a person's beliefs, the attempt to personalize issues or judge the people making an argument on the basis of their identity characteristics largely facilitates irrationality. Certain norms with regards to these situations must be established, although there should be a plurality of approaches due to the ambiguity of where lines should be drawn and the different temperaments of individuals within different communities.

Another concern which can arise is that unlimited freedom of speech can lead to irrational voices gaining more prominence than they may in fact deserve. As discussed in [Psychology of Belief](https://prometheandissident.github.io/psychology/#psychology-of-belief), beliefs do not simply serve the individual as they attempt to understand the world, but can also serve an individual through allowing them to gain status. Conformity to current dogmas is one means through which an individual can gain or maintain status, and if those dogmas are irrationally derived, then freedom of speech can lead to the propping up and legitimization of irrational voices, thus further promoting irrationality. Once again, to address this, a plurality of approaches should be preferred. People should be free to establish different spaces with differing individuals and norms, some of which will inevitably select against this type of dynamic.

It should go without saying that adhering to the paradox of tolerance or establishing norms around dialogue should largely be a private activity and not managed by the state. The only exceptions to this would be extreme cases where a large institution such as a business or university would better serve the public if it had true freedom of speech and it doesn't absent regulation.

## The Limits of Freedom of Speech

In general, when it comes to establishing norms around freedom of speech, I support a cultural plurality of approaches unless deemed extremely necessary to have a particular restriction imposed by law. There are challenges associated with regulating speech in various communities, online and non-online, which may necessitate some restriction of speech to promote rational dialogue. Social media platforms exhibit an immense diversity of approaches, with some being less restrictive than others. In the current social media climate, there is a sufficently pluralistic approach that I would deem acceptable such that legal restrictions are largely unnecessary. X/Twitter functions as a free speech absolutist space which makes restricting the vast majority of other platforms from being censorious redundant, and while there could be a case for restricting YouTube due to its monopoly on long-form videos as a niche, this would only deal with a single company.

It is nonetheless necessary for the state to restrict some forms of speech. The ones which everyone agrees upon include direct calls to action and certain forms of speech which may indirectly incite violence. A direct call to action may take the form of directing a person to commit an act of violence, as it can directly lead to violence occurring. A form of speech which may indirectly incite violence may take the form of yelling "fire!" in a crowded theatre, as it can lead to a stampede which can kill people.

Some states go a step further and impose "hate speech" laws. It is the case that some forms of speech, even if not directly inciting violence, may nonetheless lead to violence or terrorism occurring. Promoting certain ideologies which have an oppression narrative, or have some societally transformative ideal which is said to only be possible through revolutionary action, can lead to violence. The first problem with this is that it is possible for some of these narratives, at least in part, to be true, despite my general rejection of such ideas. However, even if all of them are false, the state and society will inevitably struggle to tell apart which narratives would lead to violence and which ones wouldn't. For example, as I argue in [The Ethics of Investigating Race and Racial Differences](https://prometheandissident.github.io/race/#the-ethics-of-investigating-race-and-racial-differences), there is a common notion that research which would suggest that population groups differ in psychological traits such as intelligence would inevitably lead to group conflict or genocide. In reality, however, in the general context that such research is brought up, it is used to argue against historical and contemporary oppression narratives, and thus may actually reduce conflict. In the current discourse where there is no ability to tell apart which narratives are false and would lead to violence on a societal level, ignoring the possible merits such ideas may have in part or in whole if for no other reason than for interesting and informative dialogue, state suppression of ideological speech is almost never warranted. I am thus extremely skeptical of hate speech laws and would reject them in virtually all of its forms.

## References

<references />
