---
layout: page
title: Morality
permalink: /morality/
---

**<u>Summary</u>**

This section deals with morality as a broad idea. I argue that contemporary moral systems tend to ignore how morality emerged, and tend to focus on abstract systems in the absence of any references to actual human nature. Any good moral system must reference the original aims of morality, and human's own underlying instincts, which are to simultaneously promote the individual and the community more broadly. A good moral system must thus be consequentialist in nature, but in a pluralistic sense, without adopting pure moral egoism or utilitarianism. I argue that states must think in more utilitarian manners compared to individuals, as they are aggregations of the interests of a large number of individuals, and that effective state-building and policy-making must be done on the basis of pragmatic functionality, in favor of human fluorishing, rather than being for the purposes of promoting some abstract ideology or set of values. This necessitates a primarily empiricist approach to policymaking, as opposed to a dogmatically object-level ideological one.

## The Origins of Morality

Morality is a phenomenon which emerged specifically with the rise of social animals or social organisms. It specifically emerges in contexts where organisms must cooperate with one another to survive or achieve other objectives. As discussed in [On Morality and Human Sociality](https://prometheandissident.github.io/psychology/#on-morality-and-human-sociality), humans are naturally social animals, and social groups emerged in humans because they were necessary for human survival. In other to succeeed in social groups, humans must establish rules of conduct between one another which allow them to effectively cooperate. Therefore, certain moral instincts, or moral foundations, emerged which give humans an intuitive understanding of what is valuable to the survival of individuals and communities.

Morality is, by its nature, **contextual**. Morality evolved in social groups, which existed in particular environmental conditions. Morality allowed humans to survive in those particular conditions, and so is only useful and coherent insofar as it allowed humans to survive in those conditions. If humans evolved in drastically different environmental conditions, our moral systems and intuitions would have evolved in different ways, and "moral systems", loosely speaking, do differ greatly between species. For example, ants instinctively have a type of moral system which de-emphasizes the survival of individual units in favor of the colony. They are "eusocial" in nature, rather than being merely "social" in the way humans are. This is because they need to be eusocial in order to survive, whereas humans don't. Morality, where it can be said to exist, is thus intrinsically dependent on the environmental context in which it is developed. There is thus, no such thing as an "objectively" good singular moral system. Moral system evolution depends upon the constraints one is faced with, and the environment it is situated in.

Given that morality is contextual, we should expect to see that moral systems become hotly debated and, from a certain vantage point, incoherent, when organisms leave the natural environmental constraints they were brought up in. Or in other words, moral systems commonly break down where there is [evolutionary mismatch](https://prometheandissident.github.io/psychology/#evolutionary-mismatch). This is why some of the hottest debates about ethics today deal with issues which, while potentially taking certain forms in times past, have fundamentally changed in their accessibility or capacity, such as in-vitro fertilization, surrogacy, or genetic engineering.

Morality is also, by its nature, **negotiative**. Because morality was used to help social groups sustain themselves, they necessarily require a component of negotiation with them. An individual who doesn't gain anything from joining a social group will be less likely to do so, and so in order for groups to maintain their cohesion, they must offer everyone something valuable in participation. This requires a willingness for each member of the group to make some personal sacrifices to help others, in exchange for being helped by the group, which requires an element of negotiation. One of the most central aspects to this process is a general moral egalitarianism, whereby everyone ought to adhere to the same standards with no strong elements of blatant ethical preference for some over others. In modern societies this takes the form of the principle of "equality under the law", which benefits everyone as it ensures that rules are predictable in their application and in their consequences for breaking.

Humans dislike cheating in the establishment of norms, and as such are naturally averse to inequalities in treatment where they occur. Social groups need some mechanism or mechanisms to discourage or prevent cheating or rule-breaking in general from occurring, otherwise groups will lose their cohesion and ultimately fall apart. This requires norms to not merely be stated and known to members of the group, but also requires active enforcement through both physical and social means. Gossip can function as a means of social enforcement, and physical force can function as a means of brute enforcement. Both are necessary in order for social norms or morality to have teeth in the groups they are established within.

Because morality is negotiative in nature, it means that morality must establish norms which generally benefit everyone to one degree or another. This means that as individuals invest in their communities or in other people, they should expect to receive something in return. This means that morality is fundamentally based in part in **reciprocity**, or the fact that moral systems should be designed to continuously benefit individuals investing in them in a continuous loop.

However, benefits do not have to come directly to the individual. Humans are a reproducing species, and value other members of their species according to their genetic similarity. If one human doesn't survive, but their offspring does, or even someone genetically similar to them does, their genes are still passed onto the future, even if to less of an extent. Thus, humans naturally value others and will engage in more moral actions towards others on the basis of genetic similarity. This is why humans tend to feel a greater obligation towards their family members than to strangers, and why people tend to be similar to their friends in various traits, including physical appearance, personality, etc. which are all proxies for genetic similarity. Morality is thus in part also based on **familiarity**.

### Implications for Moral Thinking

There is enormous variation in how moral systems descriptive operate, even with these sets of constraints which limit the number of moral systems which could emerge among humans. These principles cannot thus be used to advocate for a specific moral system over any other, but it can be used to argue why some systems would be fundamentally anti-human.

Many people like to make up human systems independently of our nature. They value creating a certain logical system which is perfectly coherent from an axiomatic level and using that to justify their morality. In many cases, the system is valued because it is consistent, irrespective of whether it actually corresponds to our nature, but this is not how morality has worked and is not how it should work. Morality exists for the purposes of promoting human survival, both as individuals and as communities. It was not designed to necessarily be consistent or coherent on an axiomatic level, except insofar as it would promote these ends. This is why many attempts to create "moral systems" can appear absurd to the average person, and is very commonly done by people who are undersocialized and high in autistic traits. It is because morality was never meant to exist in that type of way.

This is not to say that creating consistent moral systems which are also good is impossible or undesirable. However, these systems must reference our underlying nature and underlying instincts in some way in order to make sense. The big challenge wiht getting anyone to accept a moral system is to answer the question of why they should care about it. As discussed previously, morality is negotiative in nature. If one creates a moral system which advocates for things which fundamentally go against a person's nature, that person is not going to take that moral system seriously. While it's doable to still have a universal moral system which a few people object to, something which will inevitably occur to some extent in a large-scale society, if it goes against the human nature of most people it will ultimately fall apart in the long-run. Thus, moral systems must reference our instincts to one degree or another. You might not care about evolution, but evolution cares a lot about you, and it will dictate how effectively your particular moral project will go.

Consistency in a moral system can be valuable. It ensures that a system is fair and makes sense to people who are in the social group. However, many people value moral consistency to an excessively large degree, to the point where they will adovcate for systems which go against human nature. Scientific paradigms are extremely valuable to analyze particular phenomena. They provide people with a way to analyze a particular field, a set of questions and issues to ask when answering questions in the field, and an effective way to teach future people about the field. However, virtually no paradigm is perfectly consistent in science, as practically all of them have edge cases and issues where questions arise. When those contradictions become too large and a paradigm is found to be replaceable with another better paradigm, then the paradigm falls and gets replaced. However, this doesn't mean that a largely consistent paradigm cannot happen to be the best thing that one might have at a particular point in time. Same thing goes with morality. Just because a moral system is not 100% consistent doesn't mean that it can't still be preferable to other moral systems which are perfectly consistent axiomatically but do not account for human nature. Paradigms can provide value even if they say false things, and moral systems can provide value even if they contradict themselves.

## In Favor of Consequentialism

Consequentialism is a moral system which values the morality of an action based on what the consequences are. Consequentialist systems, when thought through well, can be far superior to systems which value the means of an action (deontology) or the thought behind an action (virtue ethics). This doesn't mean that every consequentialist system is good, and I do not endorse naive egoism or utilitarianism as systems. However, basing morality on the consequences of actions appears to be the most reasonable position.

Given that morality instinctively emerged for a particular purpose, we should ask ourselves what the purpose was and ensure that our moral systems are in line with that underlying purpose. As discussed previously, the purpose of moral systems is to ensure that human social groups can cooperate effectively, thus benefiting both the individual and the group simultaneously, ultimately to ensure that both the individual and the group can survive, reproduce, and thrive. Thus, morality was derived for consequentialist purposes - towards a particular end in mind. Deontological and virtue ethical systems fail in that they do not recognize this reality. The challenge always arises as to why a deontological or virtue ethical principle is good, and the reasons why any principle in those systems can be argued to be good is through some type of consequence it has. Such systems are thus self-refuting.

Many consequentialists will note this reality of morality, and then naively argue that morality should serve either purely the individual in the case of naive egoism or purely the collective in the case of utilitarianism. Purely egoistic views of ethics ignore the fact that humans are fundamentally involved in social groups which have special obligations on the basis of genetic similarity. They act as if people are not created on the basis of self-sacrifice, when in reality    they are. The act of raising a child, which virtually every person is at some point, necessitates self-sacrifice on the part of one individual towards another. It is in our nature to be self-sacrificing to some degree, and ignoring this reality betrays the fundamental familiarity principle of morality.

Utilitarianism betrays the familiarity principle of morality, but in a different way. It treats everyone as if they are all of equal moral obligation to everyone, when this ignores the fact that individuals have special obligations towards people on the basis of genetic or relational proximity, which means that there is necessarily inequality between individuals based on how much obligation we have towards them. Utiliarianism at its logical conclusion necessitates endless self-sacrifice, which people instinctively resist in their nature, meaning that pure "utilitarians" either have to live their lives in complete contradiction to their ethical system, or repeatedly come up with unconvincing rationalizations for why they can continue not acting like an actual utilitarian in the exact way that they do.

In reality, people naturally put their own self-interest first, but are willing to make sacrifices for others so long as it does not significantly harm themselves. The degree to which they are willing to engage in self-sacrifice, as stated repeatedly, depends on both the costs and the relational and genetic proximity of the individual they are making sacrifices for, as approximately guided by principles such as Hamilton's rule<ref>https://www.britannica.com/science/Hamiltons-rule</ref> (see [The Emergence of Morality in Social Groups](https://prometheandissident.github.io/psychology/#the-emergence-of-morality-in-social-groups)). It's important to remember that human morality emerged because of groups. Morality is a balance between the survival interests of the individual and the survival interests of the group. As such, a purely egoistic system of morality, as well as a purely utilitarian system of morality, will fail to capture human nature.

The fact that individuals are not purely utilitarian in nature creates collective action problems, analogous to the Prisoner's dilemma, a famous case where two self-interested individuals playing a game will naturally end up at an outcome with is suboptimal for both of them. Prisoner's dilemma problems can emerge in large-scale social groups which exceed Dunbar's number, where it becomes very easy for individuals to take advantage of one another or cheat as they face little individual cost for doing so. Large-scale social groups have a number of benefits, including greater total intelligence, a stronger division of labor, greater productivity, and more. However, these necessitate enforcement mechanisms which go beyond social norms in order to ensure that people do not take advantage of one another. In the absence of a state which can actively enforce certain laws and norms, game-theoretic problems which emerge with things like public goods or crime cannot be effectively resolved. States require taxation and other involuntary and aggressive uses of force in order to effectively be able to do their job, which means that coersion is necessary in order to have large-scale social groups. This is why political systems such as left-wing anarchism or anarcho-capitalism ultimately fail, and why they have never been effectively attempted, as they cannot solve these game-theoretic problems inherent to human nature.

While the consequentialism I advocate for, which I would label as "pluralistic consequentialism", cannot make a fully cohesive explanation of obligations in the same way that a purely egoistic or purely utilitarian system would, it allows us to recognive differential obligations, which explains phenomena such as the stronger feelings of kinship people have towards those who are more genetically similar to them. There is no clear rule that allows us to ascertain how much self-sacrifice for others is to be morally expected, but pluralistic consequentialism acknowledges human nature and understands that it isn't infinite and it isn't nothing either.

### The Ends of Consequentialism

So I've made a case for why I think that pluralistic consequentialism, which cares about the outcomes of individuals and communities, is preferable to other systems of morality, whether it be broad deontological or virtue ethical systems, or utilitarian or egoistic consequentialist systems. What ends should we be aiming for beyond this? What does it mean for an outcome to be "good" or "bad"?

I don't think there is a simple answer to this, but it must involve "human fluorishing" to one degree or another. It should take into account the importance of the well-being of people today as well as the well-being of people tomorrow, such that societies are good when people of all ages are functioning well, people are having children, there is general material prosperity, and people are well-socialized and well-integrated into communities or society. The answer to what ends we ought to pursue must recognize and integrate the reality that people are not fully independent from one another, nor are they fully dependent.

### Political Implications

Proper political systems have to recognize and respect the reality that morality is neither purely egoistic nor is it purely utilitarian in nature. However, because it can effectively force individuals to engage in certain behaviors, it can help address prisoner's dilemma problems which emerge in large-scale social groups through forcing people to cooperate with one another. Thus, there is a role for a state to exist which may have to engage in coersive behavior such as taxation in order to sustain itself.

Because the state is an entity which is designed to rule over people and protect them, it has greater obligation to engage in utilitarianistic policy-making. This doesn't mean it's right for the state to force people to make significant self-sacrifices, but it does mean that the state has a greater obligation to act in the interests of everyone. The state effectively acts as an aggregation of people's preferences, either directly through a degree of democratic decision-making, or indirectly in that it requires the cooperation of the masses in order to exist. Any state will fall if the masses refuse to cooperate with its demands, and as such, it has natural incentives to not act in too oppressive of a way. Because of the state's more utiltiarianistic responsibilities, it is justified in acting in more coercive ways to maximize utility, such as through the use of reidistributive taxation, so long as such actions actually benefit the aggregate of people living within the state.

In practice, given that the state ought to pursue consequentialistic ends, the primary focus of politics should be not to pursue any ideology which advocates for an abstract set of values, such as "conserving" a set of traditions, promoting "liberty", or promoting "equality", but rather should be in favor of looking what is pragmatically functional for a particular society. Thus, attempts to come up with good political systems and good policies should be focused on looking at the consequences of those ideas, which requires a strong empiricist bent with looking at what the effects of particular things are, and the weighing of tradeoffs, costs, and benefits of particular things. I am thus very much in favor of the development of a strong [epistemology](https://prometheandissident.github.io/epistemology/), or philosophy of knowledge, among policymakers. Politics should be a fundamentally empirical and logistical game, focused on how to optimize for particular outcomes based on empirical evidence, rather than appealing to abstract ideologies or other abstract concepts, as I will get to.

## Against Abstractions

Much of political and moral philosophy involves the use of absrtract terms which virtually no one agrees on, such as the idea of "equality" or "rights". These terms often have deontological implications when used - expressing the idea that a particular action or state of affairs is intrinsically right or wrong, even when it leads to positive outcomes. They furthermore often appeal to abstract assumptions about the nature of humanity or morality which are flatly false.

Take the notion of "equality". What is equality? Does equality mean that every individual is paid the same? Does it mean that every individual is treated the same? As Karl Marx pointed out, true equality is virtually impossible so long as individuals make different decisions than one another. For example, suppose there are two individuals, individual A and individual B. Both individuals work a job where they are paid $10 an hour. Individual A works 6 hours a day, while individual B works 8 hours a day. Thus, individual A makes $60 a day while individual B makes $80 a day. Are the two individuals equal? Both individuals have differential levels of income and spare time, and as such are not equal in terms of their outcomes. What if we raise individual A's pay to match individual B's pay? Then, they still would not be equal, as both individuals would be making the same, but individual A would have 2 more hours of free time than individual B. As a result, differential decisions necessitate inequality.

The problem with equality as an abstraction is that it can mean any number of different things, and despite its conceptual vaugeness, it carries so much moral weight that to suggest that people are not equal is highly taboo in many circles. But on many domains, people are obviously not equal to one another. Some people are taller than others, some people are more athletic than others, some people are more intelligent than others, some people are more creative than others, some people are more sociable than others, and so on. Many of these traits are, to some degree, innate to people and cannot be made equal between individuals through any level of social engineering.

I don't mean to suggest that "equality" can never have a meaningless use for it, or that it can never be used legally. For example, equality under the law, the view that the application of the law should be unbiased is a valuable goal. However, the general concept of equality conflates the descriptive with the prescriptive and has so many definitions that it ceases to have meaning in many contexts.

A conceptual problem also comes with the idea of "rights". What is a human right, and where does it come from? Some people argue in favor of the idea that there is such a thing as "natural rights", or rights which exist simply because humans exist. However, there is no reason to assume that humans are innately endowed with rights. As stated previously, any moral principle only matters insofar as it can be enforced. Thus, rights only matter insofar as they can be enforced with teeth, generally speaking through the use of a state apparatus. As Jeremy Bentham famously said, the idea of "natural rights" is merely "nonsense on stilts". Rights do not exist in some state of nature, and are merely social constructions which substantively matter insofar as they can be enforced.

One of the big issues with the conception of rights is what gets counted as a right and what doesn't. Generally speaking, in legal terms a right is something which a state has to guarantee to people. For example, the "right to life" as enshrined in a constitution implies that the state has a moral obligation to provide that thing, in this case generally speaking through the protection of citizens from being murdered. However, over time debates have increasingly been occurring over whether an ever-increasing number of things ought to count as rights. Is healthcare a human right? What about education? What about the internet? All of these rights if enshrined by a constitution imply that the state has a moral obligation to provide them to some degree or another. But what makes a right "good" or "bad"? It would obviously have to do with the consequences that protecting such a right would have. It is possible for the state to not recognize certain things as rights and it ultimately lead to a greater protection of that "right" in effect. For example, I argue that markets are generally a better way of organizing goods and services compared to central planning, and if that is the case, then having "food" be a human right would actually in the long-run lead to a lesser ability for individuals in a society to effectively be provisioned food. As a result, any time a state suggests that something is a human right, it must always be considered with respect to the consequences that it would ultimately have on society.

I do think that rights can be good as a legal construct, but when used outside of this context they inevitably serve to obscure discussions rather than provide light. There is no such thing as a right which exists outside of a legal institution, and anyone who asserts that something is a right presupposes that the state providing for it or protecting it would be the best means by which it should be provisioned. Furthermore, enstantiating something as a right implies that it is not up for debate, and as such, once something is established as a right, it becomes very difficult to remove its legal status as one. If a private market wasn't able to efficiently provide healthcare when it was established as a right, but now is able to because of technological advances or advances in other areas, it may be the case that healthcare should no longer be considered a right. However, the very enstantiation of healthcare as a right prevents that from occurring, while a case where healthcare is not a legal right but is still government-provided might be a more reasonable position to have. Note that I am not saying these are my views on whether private or public ownership of healthcare is better. For my actual position see [Healthcare Policy](https://prometheandissident.github.io/economics/#healthcare-policy).

Another issue which has significant conceptual flaws is the abstract concept of "freedom", particularly when considering the distinction between "positive" and "negative" freedom, or "positive rights" versus "negative rights". The positive-negative dichotomy suggests that there is a meaningful distinction between "freedom to" something versus "freedom from" something, when in reality these are not fully separable. For example, "freedom of speech" is often considered a negative right, as it suggests that no one can be persecuted or murdered for their speech. Thus, there is freedom from government suppression. However, functionally speaking, freedom of speech also necessarily contains elements of a positive right, in that there positively needs to be a legal system in place to prosecute actors who murder others for their speech. This requires the government to actively provide a legal system, which requires things like taxation. Thus, freedom of speech is both a positive right and a negative right.

While I do not believe that people have free wills in a descriptive sense, there is a colloquial sense in which people talk about freedom which I think has relative coherence and can be discussed in a way which is compatible with a deterministic view of the world. And under this functional understanding of freedom, which requires people to have the ability to "make choices" independent of constraints, there can be both passive and active constraints which functionally exist to limit people's freedom. For example, a person's "right to life" can be limited by another person murdering them, but it can also be functionally limited through the inability of that person to sustain themselves, for example, in terms of food. Consequentialisticaly-speaking, both of these are effective violations of a person's right to life, but one of them is considered a negative freedom (freedom from murder), while the other is considered a positive freedom (freedom to food). I am not saying that states which have the right to life enstantiated should also have a right to food enstantiated. The point is that the right has both positive and negative aspects to it, which makes the distinction between "positive rights" and "negative rights" meaningless.

In short, while there can be value in having very specific definitions of many of these terms, such as equality used in the context of "equality under the law", and rights used in the context of constitutional protections for things like freedom of speech, these concepts are over-used in moral discussions in ways which undermine their actual meaningfulness. I am therefore against the use of abstractions in political discourse generally speaking, unless they are used in very particular legal contexts. Instead of using deontological concepts to argue about morality, I view politics primarily in terms of pragmatic functionality towards a particular set of ends, which requires an assessment of policies based on their merits and not on particular abstractions.

## References

<references />
