---
layout: page
title: Persuasion
permalink: /persuasion/
---

## Why Persuasion is Important

## On Persuadability Towards Better Philosophical/Political Beliefs

As discussed in [Psychology of Belief](https://prometheandissident.github.io/psychology/#psychology-of-belief), people are not perfectly rational. In general, the more explicitly personal and relevant to the group an idea becomes, the less rational people are going to be surrounding it. For example, people are more willing to change their minds about an abstract mathematical idea if they are given a proof, as opposed to a belief about whether democracy or another political system would be preferable. The average person is thus not particularly good at being persuaded of a given issue. However, not everyone is the same. There are a number of signs which suggest that someone may be persuaded about an issue (note: some of this is influenced by the blogger Brittonic Memetics, who had a guide on persuasion for leftists specifically which has some generalized value<ref>https://brittonicmemetics.wordpress.com/2020/05/22/fixing-receptive-leftists/</ref>). These signs will be focused primarily on persuasion towards political or philosophical beliefs. Even though in some sense, many of them cannot necessarily be said to be "true" or "false", it is certainly the case that many of them are in part based on true or false propositions, so persuasion towards truth is still important. Similarly, persuasion towards particular values, while oftentimes a bit more difficult as it can deal with underlying human drives, can still work and is important. Here are some indicators of persuadability:

- **Is open to conversation -** If someone doesn't have this, persuasion is a non-starter, as no openness to conversation means conversation cannot meaningfully occur, and thus persuasion cannot occur.
- **They value truth and think that truth is on their side -** If someone values the truth, they will naturally be more likely to be persuaded towards it, as they will be relatively less concerned with other values such as temporary shame, social consequences, or other things which are irrelevant towards whether a given proposition is true. They will thus be more amenable to attempts at persuasion through logical reasoning and pointing out inconsistencies in alternative positions.
- **They have a history of changing their mind -** A person changing their mind in the past can be an indicator that they are generally more suggestible, and also that in some cases they are more willing to adjust their opinion in accordance with new evidence.
- **They haven't invested too much into their beliefs -** If a person has a social or economic incentive to hold a set of beliefs, it can be very difficult to change their view on it. For example, if their entire friend circle is comprised of people who share that belief dogmatically, they will naturally feel pressure to hold that belief regardless of persuasion attempts. Similarly, if that person has a job which requires them to adhere to that belief, the economic or social penalty associated with rejecting that belief can be substantial and dissuade someone from being persuaded. Furthermore, the longer a person has invested into their beliefs, the more difficult it can be to change them. This is because people are averse to sunk costs and want to view themselves as intelligent, and to protect their ego will rationalize their beliefs so that they don't have to potentially come to terms with them believing irrational things for so long. This is part of the reason why it can be easier to change the beliefs of someone who is younger.
- **Has heterodox viewpoints for their "tribe" -** Most people who are interested in politics or philosophy tend to have a "tribe" that they adhere to ideologically, such as progressivism, conservatism, libertarianism, etc. If that person identifies with a particular tribe, but holds one or more viewpoints which are not associated with that tribe, that implies that the person is more independent in their thought, and so is more open to being broken out of a particular tribe and towards a better/more truthful worldview. Ideologues - people who strongly and dogmatically adhere to a specific ideological doctrine - are much less likely to be persuadable.

## Methods of Persuasion

Persuasion fundamentally comes down to recognizing why people believe the things they do, and why they tend to be non-amenable to having their minds changed. Methods of persuasion have to be concerned with lowering the costs of changing their mind, whether they be social, egotistical, or something else, while simultaneously increasing the benefits. The book "How to Have Impossible Conversations: A Very Practical Guide" by Peter Boghossian and James Lindsay has great suggestions on how to engage in persuasive conversations and rhetoric<ref>"How to Have Impossible Conversations: A Very Practical Guide" by Peter Boghossian and James Lindsay</ref>. They argue that "impossible conversations," or ones involving very controversial topics in politics and philosophy, are in a sense a skill to be mastered, as well as a habit to be engaged with. Much of the tips here will draw upon this work:

**Instill doubt**

It is extremely rare that mid-conversation, someone will have their mind changed on a given issue. That can oftentimes be very painful for a person and damage their own ego. The purpose of attempts to persuade should not be to have them change their mind in the middle of a conversation, but let them stew in their thoughts on their own in an environment where their ego feels less threatened, which is in general when they're alone. Furthermore, a person's ego is less hurt when their mind is changed when they believe that their mind isn't being changed by someone else, but they're changing their own mind. Therefore, you want to have them work through the process of changing their mind on their own as much as possible. Rather than being an active person in that process, you merely want to sew the seeds. The best way to do this is by instilling doubt in their beliefs, as it doesn't directly lead to them agreeing with you, but it begins a process which may end with them changing their mind.

- **Ask questions -** The best way to instill doubt in a person is to ask questions about their beliefs and why they believe the things they do. Think the "Socratic method", although in general you want to be a bit less aggressive in your efforts compared to what is implied by said method. If done right, this can lead them to doubt their beliefs.
- **Don't deliver sermons -** Once a conversation starts to feel more like a lecture, an implicit power dynamic is formed where by them agreeing to your viewpoint, you are framed as a more intelligent person than they are. As such, "messages" are fairly ineffective at persuasion. What is much better is a dialectic, whereby both parties gradually arrive at a conclusion. If you want a particular message to be communicated, don't deliver it outright. Instead, gradually poke and prod at their ideas in such a way which gradually leads to the conclusion that you want them to reach.
- **Know when to end a conversation -** In general, a person is less likely to have their mind changed in one conversation, not even in the middle of one conversation in a set. Generally, they will change their mind on their own. This is when they feel less social pressure, have their guard up less, and can also make them believe that they changed their own mind. Conversations should generally be done to slowly get someone to believe your ideas, and one shouldn't expect that to happen in a single conversation. With persuasion generally happening outside of conversations, the most important thing to do is to establish doubt and get them to think about their own beliefs on their own. Conversations should end when they begin to ask questions about their own beliefs, and there should be no further attempt to engage with their beliefs in that conversation. Conversations should also be ended when things get too heated or tense, as you generally don't want to end a relationship over a disagreement. Taking a break from a tough conversation, particularly one about controversial issues, can help both parties be more amenable to one another's side at some point in the future.
- **Introduce scales to see how confident the person is in their beliefs -** This can lead to the person becoming a bit more introspective about their own belief. If you ask them to say how confident they are on a scale of 1-10, where 1 is not confident at all while 10 is 100% confident, where their confidence is placed can reveal where a person has doubt, and gives you the opportunity to poke and prod more at that doubt to help it grow. This can also help you keep track of how effective your persuasion attempts are if you ask them this question over the course of one or more conversations. You therefore get a form of "data" which can better inform what tends to work when persuading others and what doesn't. This allows you to be more surgical in your persuasion attempts and also lets you practice and improve your skills better.

**Let go of your ego, and preserve theirs**

Argumentation is a form of sport, and carries social ramifications. People who are seen as incorrect on an issue are likely to be seen as unintelligent to themselves or others. Many people are uncomfortable with changing their mind, not simply because they feel like they have previously been stupid, but also because they feel stupid _relative_ to another person. As such, attempts at actually persuading a person must frame conversations away from this dynamic and towards one where whether one's mind is changed has no effect on their ego or their relative status. This also requires some willpower on one's own part. In attempts to persuade someone else, it can be easy for many to view it in terms of status, and become attached to the idea of "beating" someone. There is ego gain attached to persuading someone of something. But this makes it less likely that the other person will be persuaded, and so care must be taken to not approach persuasion in this way. There are a number of techniques which are important to keep in mind when doing this:

- **View yourself as a partner in a conversation, not as an opponent or adversary -** While this does not need to be explicitly established, adopting this approach helps the conversation appear much less combattive, which can lead the person you're talking to into a more persuadable state. When you're both framed as being on the same "team", the goal is to reach some common conclusion together which is better for both of you, as opposed to some match where there is a winner and a loser. You should try to establish rapport with the person you're talking to, as that makes them more receptive.
- **Depersonalize your language -** Talk about ideas rather than who holds a particular idea. if you're discussing an idea that the person you're talking to holds, don't refer to it as "your idea", but as "this idea" or some related depersonalized terminology. Similarly, never say that the person you're talking to is wrong, but say that "this idea" is wrong, although even then that may still be a bit too harsh of language. This primes the person to be less emotionally attached to the idea, as it is not socially attached to them in particular, so them letting go of it wouldn't harm their ego. Similarly, don't gloat if the person you're talking to comes around to your view.

**Modelling**

Modelling is extremely important when it comes to persuading others. It involves mimicking the type of person you want your interlocutor to be. You want the person you're talking to to be receptive, open-minded, and willing to change their view, so you must outwardly express a similar attitude. People tend to mirror the attitudes and expressions of the person they're talking to. You can use this to your advantage by framing yourself in the exact way you want them to behave.

- **Never attack the person you're talking to -** If they attack you, express sympathy at their frustration and shift the conversation towards ideas and away from personalities.
- **Don't act rude or arrogant -** This is self-explanatory. If you're rude or arrogant, this will cause them to shut down and become closed-minded.
- **Adopt a learning frame and listen -** This can be beneficial as you want your partner to be open to learning from you and to listen to whatever ideas you have or internalize whatever doubts you are trying to instill in them. But there is an additional benefit to this, which is that it can allow you to learn something from them. Conversations like this aren't merely valuable from the perspective of trying to persuade someone. Even in the middle of a conversation with someone you generally disagree with, you can learn lots just by listening to them and their perspective. They may say something that you've never thought of before, and you should take this as an opportunity for yourself.
- **Change your mind when you realize you're wrong -** This is related to the previous point. The underlying purpose of these conversations is to help people get closer towards the truth, but everyone is flawed and it's entirely possible that you may be wrong in the perspective you have which you're trying to change your partner towards. In this case, it is better for yourself to acknowledge that you're wrong. This can similarly be beneficial in later conversations on different issues, as modelling changing your mind when you're wrong can help them be more open-minded and change their mind when you've said something particularly compelling to them.
- **Assume good intentions of the person you're talking to -** This can help you act in a more polite and persuasive manner when you're talking to your partner, and can also cause them to let their guard down, so that they are more receptive to having their mind changed.

## References

<references />
