---
layout: page
title: Post-Progressivism
permalink: /post-progressivism
---

## Against contemporary progressivism

Contemporary progressivism, or the modern interpretation of progressivism, tends to come in two strands. One is a social progressivist strand, which views progress in terms of the expanding moral circle<ref>https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-019-12227-0</ref>, or as the sacralization of historically marginalized groups, including racial, gender, and sexual minorities<ref>https://erickaufmann.substack.com/p/early-sources-of-woke</ref>. This sacralization can also extend to disabled people, the homeless, the poor, or in some strands, even non-human animals. A second strand is a technological progressivist one. Rather than viewing progress in social terms, technological progressivism views progress in terms of the expansion and development of technology.

Embedded within both conceptions of contemporary progressivism is an implicit or explicit notion that 1) the future will inevitably move in the direction of said typology of progressivism; 2) that said typology of progressivism is intrinsically good; and 3) that said typology of progressivism involves the promotion of novelty in some way. However, under social progressivism, none of these three conditions actually apply, and technological progressivism, while fulfilling conditions 1 and 3, struggles to fulfill condition 2.

With regard to social progressivism, despite the use of implicit language and assertions that the ideology is on the “right side of history”, implying that social progressivism will inevitably win, the ideology fails to offer any substantive mechanism through which the expanding moral circle or increased sacralization of historically marginalized groups is in fact an inevitability. Thus, rather than the assertions constituting statements of fact or objective laws of progress, they are better understood as religious or rhetorical in nature.

Social progressivism is furthermore not inherently good. While an in-depth analysis of the ideology goes far beyond the scope of this text, there are numerous reasons to believe this to be the case. The epistemology of social progressivism places an excessive emphasis on the notion that human behavior is environmentally mediated, when in reality, it is a complex mixture of genetics and environment. Thus, inequalities which progressivism aims to reduce are, in many cases, partly or largely genetically mediated, which means that their reduction is in many cases not possible or desirable. Furthermore, social progressivism ignores the reality of tradeoffs between cultural diversity and group-level equality of outcomes, both of which are supported in the sacralization of minority groups through advocacy for causes such as diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) initiatives. In reality, due to the strong influence cultural diversity has in organically producing differential outcomes between groups, cultural diversity almost always necessitates inequity.

Finally, social progressivism is not intrinsically pro-novelty, as it advocates for restrictions on many novel innovations on the basis that they risk de-sacralizing certain groups. Examples include restrictions on controversial research, as shown through extensive instances of academics being mobbed or censured for their ideas<ref>https://psychrabble.medium.com/the-threat-to-academic-freedom-from-academics-4685b1705794</ref>; the rise of research ethics requirements, which while necessary in certain contexts, have effectively led to bans on conducting certain types of legitimate research<ref>https://www.nature.com/articles/s41562-022-01443-2</ref>; and opposition to certain technologies on the basis that they are biased racially or in other ways, such as machine learning predictive policing algorithms<ref>https://www.technologyreview.com/2020/07/17/1005396/predictive-policing-algorithms-racist-dismantled-machine-learning-bias-criminal-justice/</ref>. In these respects, social progressivism may be anti-novelty, and may ironically exhibit anti-progressive qualities.

Technological progressivism performs better than social progressivism in substantively aligning with its implicit and explicit messaging. The ideology does have mechanisms through which its conception of progress emerges, namely through innovation. While this is not necessarily always the case, as there have been periods of history where technology has been lost, thus constituting a form of technological regression, the present institutional, technological, and cultural climate allows for technology to inevitably progress continuously. Technological progressivism also advocates in favor of novelty, as its focus is entirely upon the development of new technologies, based on the assumption that technological innovation is inevitably a positive development for humanity.

The problem with technological progressivism is that this assumption is not always correct. The ideology ignores the reality of evolutionary mismatch<ref>https://www.aporiamagazine.com/p/counterfeit-people-are-here-to-replace</ref>, whereby rapid novel changes to an organism’s environment, in this case a human’s, leads to a mismatch between an individual’s biology and their environment. In the context of human development, this can lead to maladaptive behaviors and responses in physical, social, reproductive, cognitive, emotional, or dietary domains. Furthermore, the transition towards certain technologies can create significant temporary or permanent social disruption which in some cases can potentially justify slowing down or halting technological progress in a particular domain.

There is nothing inherently wrong with having some form of progress as a political ideal, or using the term as a rhetorical device, in an attempt to advocate for a particular political, institutional, or cultural order. However, progress needs to be decoupled from the idea that it is inevitable and that it is intrinsically pro-novelty. Instead, progress should primarily be conceptualized as an improvement towards what is ultimately good. The term implicitly recognizes that there is a better state than what has existed previously, but it should make no pretensions that progress is synonymous with the passage of time or is inevitable. In reality, progress in whichever context it is discussed can only be inevitable with the presence of certain mechanisms which ensure that it is.

Progress also needs to be recognized under a universal frame, which does not merely apply to social policy or cultural norms in the case of social progressivism, or correlates of economic development in the case of technological progressivism. The expanding moral circle and technological development can certainly be seen as aspects of progress, when taken in moderation and with respect to more fundamental societal goals. However, these conceptions of progress lack sufficient generality to function as good frames through which to view progress.

A proper view of progress thus must be universal, and must recognize the institutional, cultural, and even biological mechanism by which it can be achieved. The core question which then arises is what the ideal ought to be according to which arrangements are to be viewed as progressive or regressive. To answer this question, I will first examine human anthropology, and the core causes and justifications for human civilization in the first place.

## On Metaethics and Social Anthropology

While the domain of areas which philosophy has reigned over and been taken seriously in has shrunken significantly over the past few millennia, ethics continues to be a hotly debated subject within the field. There has been little intellectual progress in the field, owing to the fact that there is still significant disagreement over the fundamentals of ethics, such as whether an ethical system which values the actions taken in themselves or the ends that those actions lead to is preferable. The answers to these questions have significant and far-reaching implications for how we organize society.

Because of the is-ought gap, the primary way in which ethical systems are tested against one another is through examining the consistency of said systems. This is done to demonstrate that an individual does not fully commit to their worldview, and as such, they must ultimately reject the worldview. The implicit assumption that morals must be extremely rigid and based on abstract systems largely ignores the context in which morality emerged. However, the core observation that moral systems ultimately derive from the underlying intuitions of people is correct.

This begs the question as to what the underlying intuitions of humanity are. In order to ascertain this, we must examine how morality emerged and why it even emerged in the first place.

Humans are a biological organism, which, like any other, evolved over the course of millions of years into what they are today. Like many primates, humans evolved in the context of social communities. We are not eusocial creatures whereby we become one big superorganism, but we are naturally social and evolved in contexts where we require being in communities in order to survive. Human communities evolved because without communities, humans died and were outcompeted by humans who were in communities<ref>https://dwz.psych.ucla.edu/wp-content/uploads/sites/114/2016/11/MoralBookReview.pdf</ref>. Many biologists argue that our brains increased in size in large part due to the necessity to survive and compete effectively within these communities, an idea commonly referred to as the “social brain hypothesis”<ref>https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19575315/</ref>.

In order for communities to function, there needs to be a set of norms which are established and generally adhered to<ref>https://www.amazon.ca/Elephant-Brain-Hidden-Motives-Everyday/dp/0190495995</ref>, as otherwise there isn’t sufficient trust for the community to function properly. These norms can be referred to as morality or ethics, and are norms which can either be enforced socially or through the use of force. Humans evolved to adapt to the reality that social rules exist, which is why humans naturally have certain moral intuitions which present themselves cross-culturally, as social psychologist Jonathan Haidt has shown with his work on moral foundations<ref>https://moralfoundations.org/</ref>. While the particulars of moral systems certainly vary substantially across cultures, the fact that morality exists cross-culturally and we have evolved moral intuitions along a number of dimensions shows that morality in some sense is natural.

Furthermore, due to high intelligence and general social integration among humans, humans have a greater capacity and willingness to engage in actions which benefit others<ref>https://www.amazon.ca/Sociobiology-New-Synthesis-Twenty-Fifth-Anniversary/dp/0674002350</ref>, not only to directly benefit themselves, but also in some cases benefit others at the expense of themselves. This phenomenon, generally referred to as kin selection<ref>https://www.britannica.com/science/Hamiltons-rule</ref>, is necessary across many animal species for the raising and survival of offspring to occur. However, in  humans, it regularly extends to a general sense of obligation to those who are more proximate genetically or relationally. This is why humans naturally feel a greater sense of obligation and belonging towards family and their own ethnic group, and also why friends tend to be more genetically similar to one another than to random people in the general population<ref>https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25024208/</ref>.

Thus, humans value their own survival, but are also willing to make some sacrifices to help the survival of others. This can help spread the genes of the individual further than a naive purely self-interested orientation and thus grant the individual greater opportunities to survive genetically. Humans primarily value their own survival, given that their own survival ensures the survival of the greatest proportion of their genome. This is partly contingent on them being in and maintaining their social groups, but in order for people to have an incentive to stay in a given social group and benefit properly from it, there needs to be a balance in place between the interests of the individual and the interests of the social group itself, or the collective.

Adaptive social systems are thus consequentialist in nature, as they are outcome-oriented towards survival interests. However, adaptive social systems are neither purely utilitarian or purely egoist, and recognize the nature of humans and how morality emerged. While other systems can in theory be devised for how morality is to occur, these systems will ultimately fail in any high-stakes context. Under any condition of harsh Darwinian natural selection, nature’s veto will eliminate other moral systems over time. This is exactly how the current moral system as described here emerged in the first place.

Throughout most of human history, people lived in small tribes of about 150 people or less, a number referred to as Dunbar’s number<ref>https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26189988/</ref>. This is an estimate based on an extrapolation of the relationship between primate social group size and relative neocortex size onto human social group sizes, and is in line with real-world observations of human friendship circles. The core limiting factor behind Dunbar’s number is the fact that the average person is only able to cognitively process every individual in a social group at up to a maximum of around 150. Beyond that number, people deindividuate from one another. This is why smaller communities and social groups tend to have greater cohesion and trust<ref>https://arxiv.org/abs/1905.05270</ref>, because as the number of individuals in a community gets larger, the ability for people to socially process everyone within the group diminishes significantly.

Once social groups exceed 150, many types of norm enforcement, such as the use of gossip, become significantly less effective, as people within the community become less and less socially recognizable to one another. As a result, such communities are lower in trust, have less social cohesion, have more conflict, and are more likely to split apart.

The way in which communities of a larger scale solve the problem of norm defection is through a greater use of non-social forms of enforcement, such as laws and hard power. This paves the way for the evolution of the state, which is said to hold a monopoly on the use of force. Communities which greatly exceed Dunbar’s number in size have the advantage of a greater ability for specialization and greater ability to exploit economies of scale in production. This makes such communities significantly stronger, and explains why over the course of recent human history, human populations have generally converged towards states.

Effective states require a general belief amongst the population that the state is morally justified, and also require certain concessions from individuals, such as taxation. Thus, individuals belong to states due to their advantages and due to their ability to survive. Nonetheless, a balance must still be struck between individual-level interests and the interests of the collective.

States are ultimately necessary for large societies due to human nature, and non-state based societies were ultimately undermined and outcompeted under nature’s veto in the same way that individuals in communities outcompeted individuals outside of communities. This is why purely anarchistic conceptions of societies ultimately fail.

This anthropological account of the history of social organization shows that morality is fundamentally consequentialistic in nature, as well as the reality that any proper view of progress must be grounded in the effective functioning of humans, both as individuals and as collectives. Under this view of progress, more progressive modes of social organization are those which benefit the ability for people to survive and thrive, not only now but into the future. A proper view of progress must account for the importance of the well-being of people today as well as the well-being of people tomorrow, such that societies are good when people cross-generationally are thriving, people are having children, there is general material prosperity, and people are well-socialized and well-integrated into communities or society. In short, it recognizes that people simultaneously exist as individuals as well as collectives, rather than merely being one or the other.

Any other view of progress risks getting outcompeted under competitive pressures. However, this risk of being outcompeted is not inevitable, and progress is thus not an inevitability under this conception. States as described in this text did not exist for the vast majority of 200,000 year lifespan of the human species. They emerged at a particular point in time, and required specific environmental and cognitive prerequisites to be fulfilled. It was only once those prerequisites were fulfilled that an evolution, or progression, in human social organization could occur. The challenge of any progressive view is thus not merely to define progress, but also to create the mechanisms under which progress can occur. The next section will outline these mechanisms in a more abstract manner.

## Progress and Evolutionary Processes

As discussed in the previous section, the state came about from an evolutionary process, as did human moral systems. Evolutionary processes are thus essential towards the achievement of progressive ends. This section will further detail how evolutionary processes work, as these are critical towards an understanding of how progress can be achieved.

Evolution fundamentally refers to change, and occurs along a wide range of dimensions, although it is traditionally studied and discussed in the context of the evolution of organisms. It should be noted that evolution is not necessarily good or bad. Evolution is to some degree inevitable, but we also have varying capacity to control it in its numerous dimensions to suit our needs. Technological progress, as previously shown, is generally done through evolutionary processes, although can lead to some harms for humanity. Thus, while evolution is very important for progressive processes, evolution in and of itself is morally neutral.

The most commonly discussed form of evolution, biological evolution, requires there to be variability in traits which are heritable in part or in whole, as well as selective mechanisms which favor some traits over others. Through this process, organisms which have traits which are selected against will gradually die off or be unable to reproduce, and will decrease in commonality in successive generations. Similarly, organisms which have traits which are selected for will gradually become more common in successive generations.

This process of evolution from a biological perspective can be generalized to other forms of evolution, with the two mechanisms abstracted further. Evolution, in general, requires variability, and a selection mechanism which favors some parts of that variability over others. This is how the evolution of social groups in humans emerged, which co-evolved alongside human genetic evolution, as gene-culture co-evolution is an inherent aspect to humanity. The evolution of social groups occurred in the way it did because there was variation in social structure or lack thereof, and selection mechanisms which led to differential survival and reproduction probabilities between individuals making up different social structures. This gradually led to some social structures being favored over others.

There are some who would object to the idea that these evolutionary processes, at least in a biological context, would apply to societies today. It is true that humans are so effective at survival that they can come up with a significant range of social organizations, all of which display relative stability over many generations<ref>https://www.amazon.ca/Sociobiology-New-Synthesis-Twenty-Fifth-Anniversary/dp/0674002350</ref>. However, this does not mean that evolutionary processes are not occurring or that some social organizations are not more effective at achieving progress compared to others. Furthermore, research has shown that if anything, human evolution has sped up in pace over the past 5,000 years<ref>https://www.science.org/content/article/human-evolution-speeding</ref>, and research has continually shown that selection mechanisms have selected in favor of or against a large number of human traits within roughly that time span<ref>https://reich.hms.harvard.edu/sites/reich.hms.harvard.edu/files/inline-files/2026_Akbari_Nature_selection_0.pdf</ref>.

The reality that humans, cultures, and social organizations have co-evolved next to each other is something which is even more important today than it was in the past. Despite significant medical and economic advances making it so that virtually everyone can, in theory, survive and reproduce, virtually any study looking at the link between heritable traits, such as intelligence, and fertility suggests that in the long-run there will continue to be directional selection across a range of traits<ref>https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19323856/</ref>. Whether we like it or not, and whether or not we deliberately do anything, human populations will continuously biologically evolve in various ways.

Once again, the purpose of this is not to suggest that evolution in the ways it occurs is intrinsically good or bad, but that evolution is the fundamental process by which organisms are able to optimally adapt to their environment. As such, the process can be adapted and analogized to how societies can, in theory, optimize themselves, so long as the proper underlying conditions are met.

In contemporary society, evolutionary systems will require variability in inputs, which requires an open society, a notion popularized by philosopher Karl Popper. While the notion of an open society has been abused by some political actors to merely advance social progressivist causes<ref>https://web.archive.org/web/20150305202847/http://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2015/03/ferguson-inc-115765.html#.VYgzbYtFCUk</ref> – just as his concept of the “paradox of tolerance” has been misused to argue against freedom of speech, when it was never intended to do so<ref>https://quillette.com/2023/08/31/tolerating-intolerance-the-free-speech-paradox/</ref> – the concept broadly is a useful way to examine how progress occurs<ref>https://www.amazon.ca/Open-Society-Its-Enemies-One/dp/0691158134</ref>.

Progress in a mechanistic sense, occurs in environments which are fundamentally open. This requires, first and foremost, the capacity for people to speak freely, debate, and implement ideas. Thus, precedence must be given to having freedom of speech, as well as economies with a strong private market sector to maximize innovation. Effective and functional societies require the presence of both openness as well as strong supporting institutions in place to ensure that progress can occur, thus explaining why the strongest economies tend to be characterized by mixed markets where there is often strong government involvement in areas such as research and development<ref>https://cepr.org/voxeu/columns/new-economics-industrial-policy</ref>.

We will now return to our more detailed and comprehensive understanding of progress, expounding upon the ways progress should be understood and how it can occur mechanistically.

## Intellectual Progress as a Bedrock

The understanding of progress as outlined here, whereby progress is consequentialistically oriented towards human flourishing, first and foremost requires an intellectual foundation. This intellectual foundation must come up with a full understanding of what is entailed by progress, in addition to an understanding of what social, cultural, and institutional norms are necessary for the fulfillment of progress.

A common but erroneous assumption made about political disagreement is that all differences in viewpoint are a function of differences in values. This is an assumption generally borne out of intellectual laziness, as it allows people to shirk the often long and difficult progress of finding out what is true about the world, and gives people a sense of unearned self-righteousness and superiority for merely having the most morally “correct” beliefs.

This erroneous assumption about political disagreement is in part made because of the over-emphasis which is commonly placed on broad moral abstractions, such as the tripartite concepts of liberty, equality, and fraternity, which have informed and led to the creation of foundational political ideologies. Ideologies such as libertarianism and anarcho-capitalism place emphasis on liberty; socialism and social progressivism on equality; and conservatism and nationalism on fraternity.

However, it is not difficult to imagine instances where all three of these values ought to be shirked to some degree, even if they can be useful considerations in certain contexts. As shown previously, some violations of liberty are necessary for the formation and sustainment of states, which require strong legal systems in place<ref>https://www.fraserinstitute.org/sites/default/files/economic-principles-for-prosperity.pdf</ref>, which in turn necessitate some involuntary taxation. Similarly, societies have certain mechanisms in place to ensure that more competent governance is achieved, at the expense of equality, such as through the institution of a minimum voting age which creates legal and structural inequalities in voting rights. Finally, there are many cases where excessively ingroup-oriented policies, or policies which excessively promote fraternity, can lead to slower economic development, as in the case of economic nationalism. Research consistently shows that a generally free trade regime promotes economic growth<ref>https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/660841468162283031/pdf/775730JRN020080alization0and0Growth.pdf</ref>, something which requires a less parochial attitude towards social and political organization.

These ideological abstractions should largely be ignored in favor of pragmatic functionality, or what directly promotes flourishing. Research consistently shows that ideology impairs the ability for individuals to engage in sound reasoning<ref>https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/1948550619829059</ref><ref>https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/13546783.2022.2038268</ref>, suggesting that strong attachment to abstractions leads to an impairment in people’s rationality. There is also some evidence suggesting that many of the neurobiological correlates of religious belief and political belief are similar<ref>https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5180221/</ref><ref>https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7195862/</ref>, which helps confirm the idea that political beliefs are generally not rationally derived.

Ideologies are largely constructions from decades, and in many cases, centuries ago. Virtually all scientific fields will reject many mainstream views in their fields from 50 or more years ago, merely because scientific knowledge can progress significantly in fields, even over the course of a single decade. Should we expect that our knowledge about the world world has increased significantly, and yet that it wouldn’t speak to at least modifying ideologies as they existed decades ago?

Rather than appealing to ideological abstractions, there needs to be a robust epistemology through which we can view the ways in which human flourishing is promoted. This must come, first and foremost, from a recognition that ideological disagreements exist heavily on the basis of differences in understanding of descriptive facts, rather than differences in values. In reality, if it was the case that centrally planned economies led to greater economic growth and more prosperity for everyone, however defined, that descriptive fact, even if it did not determine whether centrally planned economies were desirable, would certainly have a bearing on the question relative to if that descriptive fact was not the case.

The misconception that political differences are primarily a question of values, borne out of intellectual laziness, is heavily perpetuated by contemporary academic institutions and the cultural milieu which follows from it. These have led to the normalization of substituting any substantive argumentation in favor of the discrediting of viewpoints through other means, most notably through various accusations of “bigotry”.

Most policy questions are in large part or in whole reducible to empirical questions about what the effects of the policies would be, as is with many questions about institutions, technology, culture, and other fundamental aspects of society. It is thus crucial to develop a coherent and effective epistemology through which truth can be arrived at, as well as to understand the institutional, cultural, and even potentially biological means through which the production of knowledge can be maximized. This latter issue can be arrived at through this new epistemology.

Contemporary academic institutions have created a false dichotomy between idealism and materialism to analyze society. This leads to the assumption that the only means by which societal change can happen is through ideas, or material or environmental forces. But there is a third option, which is to understand the influence which biology and evolutionary processes have, an option which can be referred to as biorealism. There must be an integration of idealism, materialism, and biorealism to come to effective and comprehensive explanations of social phenomena, and thus understand how we should govern and structure society, culture, and institutions.

A robust epistemology also requires a stronger and more sophisticated approach to studying social phenomena which moves away from purely verbal accounts of knowledge and phenomena which risk cultural and personal bias, in favor of the use of quantitative research and a strong empiricist approach. Contemporary academic institutions have become closed systems due to their dominance by social progressivist forces, which promote ideological hegemony, as well as hostility and censoriousness towards ideas which may undermine the empirical presuppositions upon which social progressivism is based. Academia has been consistently shown to ideologically lean left in the social sciences, and contrary to the notion that this is due to social progressivism merely being more rational or social progressives being more truth-oriented, in reality this bias is largely due to a hostile climate for those who question the ideological hegemony, active discrimination against non-leftists, and subtle biases which present themselves throughout academia<ref>https://www.adamsmith.org/research/lackademia-why-do-academics-lean-left</ref><ref>https://osf.io/preprints/psyarxiv/qpn57_v1</ref>.

Knowledge production requires diverse viewpoints and open systems in order to be maximized. Research consistently shows that intellectual diversity, as measured by diversity in educational background<ref>https://docs.iza.org/dp6973.pdf</ref> or values<ref>https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/13504851.2015.1130785#abstract</ref>, is positively related to productivity and innovation, while the types of diversity commonly promoted by social progressives, such as racial or diversity, appears to have no effect on innovation if it is not accompanied by intellectual diversity<ref>https://www.emerald.com/ejim/article-pdf/25/6/941/1864210/ejim-09-2021-0474.pdf</ref>. Furthermore, research into how researchers choose to analyze a given empirical topic with political implications suggests that they will come to vastly different and even opposing conclusions, even when using identical data<ref>https://www.pnas.org/doi/10.1073/pnas.2203150119</ref>. It is only when there is diversity in research approaches that we can uncover this inherent ambiguity and uncertainty of knowledge, and then hope to make scientific progress. Just as biological evolution requires genetic variation, evolution in knowledge first and foremost requires variance in intellectual approaches, values, and theoretical outlooks.

In order for viewpoint diversity to occur, there must be the capacity to even express diverse viewpoints in the first place. The capacity to express differing viewpoints requires strong protections for freedom of speech as well as academic freedom. Research consistently shows that freedom of speech is positively related to economic growth and innovation<ref>https://justitia-int.org/analyse-ytringsfrihed-skal-nytte/</ref>, and that academic freedom is positively related to innovation<ref>https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=4384419</ref>. This provides empirical support for the idea that an evolutionary view of knowledge production, as protected through legal and social infrastructure, is crucial towards progress.

Thus, there must be the ability for people to say controversial things, or things which may go against the prevailing norms or mores of society, and strong protections for those who do. These strong protections must not merely be limited to legal protection, but also cultural and institutional protections to ensure that people functionally speaking have the ability to speak freely. If a person is unfairly discriminated against in hiring for their views, is fired, is prevented from using major modes of communication such as social media, or mobbed by the general public for their views, functionally speaking freedom of speech is being threatened<ref>https://zerocontradictions.net/pdfs/freedom-of-speech.pdf</ref>.

Open systems require not only freedom of speech, which allows for variation in thought and ideas, but also generalized economic freedom, which allows for variation in the execution of ideas. Economic freedom, which relates to free markets, property rights protections, private ownership, low regulation, among other things, is generally associated with greater economic growth<ref>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejpoleco.2005.06.003</ref>, as well as generalized prosperity along a range of metrics<ref>https://doi.org/10.1111/coep.12010</ref>. Markets must be supported by a mixed system whereby there is a strong public research and development sector and reasonable regulations such as patent protections which allow for innovation to be maximized<ref>https://www.amazon.ca/Encyclopedia-Political-Economy-2-set/dp/041524188X</ref>.

Free markets allow for a large variety of intellectual innovations to be tested out in marketplace settings with relatively few barriers. Meanwhile, a public research and development sector creates avenues for innovations which may be too risky for private firms or individuals to be willing to invest in, too expensive, or without a clear and immediate expected profit return. Contrary to assumptions that public investment into research and development will crowd out private sources of innovation, public investment may actually crowd in private investment and thus lead to more innovation even in the private sector<ref>https://d1bcsfjk95uj19.cloudfront.net/files/Where_do_innovations_come_from.pdf</ref>.

Technological development has been consistently identified as the fundamental driver of economic growth within societies<ref>https://www.amazon.ca/Encyclopedia-Political-Economy-2-set/dp/041524188X</ref>. While as discussed previously, technological progressivism has limitations in that technology can create problems just as it can solve them, it is the case that material prosperity in a general sense is positively related to human flourishing. Thus, while technological development should never be seen as an end in itself, as a means to an end it can be extremely valuable.

A general free market approach does not preclude the possibility of a social safety net, or of some industries having more government control. Universal healthcare systems, which generally necessitate a mixed market structure to some degree, have been identified as performing stronger than healthcare systems characterized by non-universality, such as that of the United States<ref>https://www.commonwealthfund.org/publications/fund-reports/2024/sep/mirror-mirror-2024</ref>, and this stronger performance on health outcomes can translate into higher economic growth due to a positive relationship between population health and economic growth. Thus, despite the general positive relationship between economic freedom and economic growth, this does not preclude some reforms away from a purely laissez-faire system and in favor of a mixed market system. Our understanding of progress must always keep consequentialism in mind, not be dogmatically attached to rigid understandings of policy, and be empiricist in terms of approaches to designing institutions and policies.

Intellectual progress is not the end goal of progress. However, it ultimately provides the foundation upon which future innovations are to happen. Open societies allow for the exchange of ideas, which allows for ideas to be discussed which may progressively improve upon society. In addition, open societies allow for healthy market economic structures for ideas to be implemented and tested in real-world settings, thus allowing for further progress to occur. Intellectual progress is thus perhaps the most important dimension of progress, and the one which has unfortunately been ignored the most, or even undermined in contemporary culture.

While thus far, the discussion has examined the importance of intellectual progress, its origins, and some of its institutional requirements, it has thus far sidestepped what is perhaps one of the most important cultural and institutional values to be upheld: competence. Progressive institutions must recognize the importance of institutional norms and laws which promote competence where it is most needed and best employed, and recognize that competence is biologically unequally distributed. Progress thus necessitates a degree of inequality, a topic we will now turn to.

## Progress and Inequality

Competence, or the ability to perform a task effectively or efficiently, is the fundamental dimension upon which individual differences in the ability to engage in intellectual progress, as well as the ability to enact the fruits of intellectual progress, can be assessed. Progress, intellectually and elsewhere, depends in part upon the proper application of competence, whereby everyone fulfils niches they are most specialized in, and whereby those with the highest competence are put in positions of highest importance. Progress is thus fundamentally meritocratic in nature.

Another way in which progressive systems must thus be open is in terms of there being no rigid class boundaries. Income and social classes must be fluid, and people should be able to rise and fall insofar as they demonstrate competence or lack of competence respectively. Progressive systems must promote class mobility insofar as it is reflective of competence, and market systems appear effective in promoting this. Research has shown that intelligence, the prime way in which competence is measured, is related with class mobility, in that those with low intelligence show downward class mobility, while those with high intelligence show upward class mobility<ref>https://www.cremieux.xyz/p/intelligence-and-social-mobility</ref>.

But what is intelligence? Intelligence is best understood according to the g factor, or the generalized factor of intelligence<ref>https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15651931/</ref>. This refers to the fact that individuals who score highly in one intellectual domain tend to also score highly in other intellectual domains. General intelligence is highly heritable, with research typically pointing to a heritability of general intelligence of 0.8, suggesting that 80 percent of the variation in general intelligence between individuals is a function of variance in genetics<ref>https://www.sebjenseb.net/p/we-now-have-280-pairs-of-identical</ref>.

Intelligence is associated with a wide range of outcomes. But most importantly, it has been shown to be one of the best, if not the best, predictor of a person’s education, occupation, and income<ref>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0160289606001127</ref>. Contrary to environmentarian theories of social mobility, intelligence is a stronger predictor of these factors than parental socioeconomic status is. Intelligence is also important on a group level, as it has been identified as one of the strongest predictors of economic growth on a national level as well<ref>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S016028961630318X</ref>. Intelligence is thus not merely important for individuals, but also for society more broadly.

Due to the high heritability of intelligence, people differ in their genetic propensity for intelligence. This means that not everyone will be able to have the same ability in any intellectual domain as other people will. All research looking at human accomplishment shows that a very small proportion of individuals make the vast majority of contributions in any given field. For example, analysis of citation numbers across papers suggests that only a very small proportion of scientists meaningfully contribute to scientific progress<ref>https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.178.4059.368</ref>. Similarly, even though national average intelligence is a strong predictor of economic growth, the intelligence of the smartest fraction of individuals in a society is an even stronger predictor of economic growth than simply looking at average national intelligence<ref>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/366691469_Smart_Fraction_Theory_A_Comprehensive_Re-evaluation</ref>. This indicates that the cognitive elite in any society is disproportionately responsible and critical for its economic development.

The goal of open societies and open systems should be to ensure that exceptional people, regardless of their starting position in life, are able to be put in positions where they can make exceptional contributions. This requires not merely a society which legally promotes meritocracy, but also a cultural acceptance that inequality is not inherently bad, and that inequality on the basis of intelligence is inevitable.

One of the largest damages which social progressivism has done to human flourishing is to produce excessive resentment over inequalities which are recalcitrant, good, or natural, between individuals, and particularly between groups. In reality, inequalities in intelligence which lead to differing social and economic outcomes are not only inevitable between individuals, but they are also inevitable between groups. There is some evidence which suggests that men have greater variability than women in cognitive ability, despite relatively similar averages between the sexes, suggesting that any field which requires a high intelligence will select for more men than women. Similarly, research has consistently identified racial differences in intelligence, which appear to be of substantial genetic origin<ref>https://www.amazon.ca/Know-Debunking-Myths-about-Intelligence/dp/1108493343</ref>. These group differences suggest that in fields which require a high cognitive ability, Jews, East Asians, and whites will almost inevitably be overrepresented relative to other racial groups.

This does not mean that there ought to be arbitrary discrimination against women or people who belong to lower-scoring racial groups. Every individual should be judged on their own merits, and there should be legal measures in place to ensure that discrimination does not happen. However, these anti-discrimination measures, and our general culture, should recognize that disparities in outcomes do not necessarily mean discrimination. Civil rights legislation which makes this erroneous assumption, as exists in the United States and elsewhere<ref>https://www.amazon.ca/Origins-Woke-Corporate-Identity-Politics/dp/0063237210</ref>, should be scrapped in favor of a regime which favors nondiscrimination but recognizes the inevitability of unequal outcomes.

In addition, none of this should be used to suggest that individuals who are of low intelligence should be dehumanized, impoverished, or otherwise mistreated by society. A meritocratic social order which promotes competence should ultimately be used to uplift everyone in the society. In fact, an individual with an IQ of 85 would ultimately be better off in a society with an average IQ of 115 rather than a society with an average IQ of 70. This is because the more intelligent society has a greater capacity to support and uplift everyone within the society, due to its greater capacity for innovation, economic development, and ultimately progress.

Furthermore, as has been previously discussed, there should be a social safety net for people who struggle to succeed in society. Research shows that inequality, when coupled with poverty or a general lack of economic well-being on an absolute level, is related to greater social resentment and hence leads to negative externalities, such as higher crime<ref>https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/1468-4446.12083</ref>. Thus, it is not only beneficial to the potential recipients of social spending to have a social safety net, but also to the broader society as a whole.

Contemporary social progressivism has attempted to flatten hierarchies and promote individuals with lower competence into positions of higher prestige and importance. This has been one of the most damaging aspects of the ideology, as it significantly undermines progress while claiming to advance it. True progress necessitates the promotion of merit and competence, and necessitates a recognition that some level of inequality will be inevitable as a result. Such a view of progress will benefit everyone, irrespective of their level of competence, or their socioeconomic standing in society.

The promotion of competence is one of the most important means by which intellectual progress is promoted, but it must always be remembered that intellectual progress is not to be pursued for its own sake. Intellectual progress is the foundation upon which the promotion of human flourishing can occur, and intellectual progress does this through allowing us to understand what institutional, cultural, and ultimately, societal changes are necessary for its promotion. This issue is where we will turn to next.

## Institutional and Cultural Progress

Institutions and culture are the primary environmental vectors through which human flourishing is achieved. Institutions effectively refer to anything which shapes and constrains behavior, while culture refers to, as discussed by E. O. Wilson, “environmental tracking devices,” which can include group-level beliefs, rituals, religions, and related practices<ref>https://www.amazon.ca/Sociobiology-New-Synthesis-Twenty-Fifth-Anniversary/dp/0674002350</ref>. Institutions are necessary to govern human interactions, and as previously discussed, played an invaluable role in the development of civilization as human communities grew to a size large enough that informal social norms could no longer effectively govern human interactions. Culture is similarly necessary, as it provides individuals with group cohesion as well as a sense of purpose. Culture allows individuals to relate to and interact with one another in a society, and as such is crucial to the identities of many, whether explicitly stated or not.

Whereas intellectual progress is much more abstract in its formulation, with it being oriented towards an end which is quite disconnected from itself, in the case of institutions and cultures, these ends are much more clear. Institutions and cultures which are progressive are those which ultimately promote human flourishing.

There are two core principles which underlie progress in the contexts of institutions and cultures. Firstly, institutions and cultures should be experimental and diverse in nature. This once again requires an open society which allows for diversity in speech and expression. However, these are not the only prerequisites.

The primary prerequisite for experimentation and diversity in cultures is the protection of freedom of association. While discrimination or exclusion must be prohibited legally and socially in the public realm, which concerns direct economic transactions, some level of exclusion in the public realm – the realm of the home, community life, and interpersonal relations – is a necessary element to protect cultural diversity. There must be cultural and political measures to allow people to create cultural associations, or even neighborhoods dedicated to preserving a particular culture, and these measures must not give preferential treatment or grants to particular groups over others. There ultimately needs to be equality under the law with regards to the protection of multiculturalism within societies.

This legal protection allows for social cohesion to be sustained within communities, because such communities have defined boundaries and characteristics, without sacrificing the general economic benefits associated with integration in the public realm. It also allows for a much larger number of cultural permutations to thrive and experiment with, as the implicit tendency for cultures and peoples to merge together when placed in social proximity to one another is abated. This leads to the development of data and knowledge, allowing us to understand which cultural permutations work to favor human flourishing and which do not.

The ability for cultural groups to segment should they choose to also allows for less conflict between individuals in cases where groups may otherwise have conflict with one another. There are many instances within areas such as education where cultural groups have significantly diverging views over what ought to occur, in ways which deal with deep cultural values over issues such as the relationship between children and their family. When cultural groups are given protections to segment from one another, this allows for people to freely move into communities where their education system and other institutions reflect their cultural preferences, which can ultimately reduce conflict and hardship which otherwise might exist.

Beyond the existence of biological differences which naturally lead to socioeconomic inequalities, environmental differences can also do so. It is well-known that culture can be a significant contributor to social and economic outcomes of individuals. For example, research has consistently shown that countries which are more culturally individualistic tend to experience higher economic growth rates than countries which are more culturally collectivistic<ref>https://cepr.org/voxeu/columns/does-culture-affect-long-run-growth</ref>. Policy which preserves or promotes cultural diversity will thus inevitably lead to inequalities between individuals and groups – a tradeoff between diversity and equity. This is generally not properly integrated into social progressivist thought, which leads to significant incoherence in their policy prescriptions.

My view is that there is a balance to be struck between institutions trying to accommodate difference versus erasing differences. The accommodation of differences generates greater social cohesion and greater experimentation, at the expense of innovation and growth in other realms such as technology. Meanwhile, the erasure of differences can generate significant economic gains for a society when done effectively. The best way to attempt to preserve both outcomes is to recognize that the gains from the accommodation of differences are primarily to be found in the private realm, while the gains from the erasure of differences are primarily to be found in the private realm. Thus, there ought to be accommodation in the private realm, and erasure in the public realm.

From the perspective of institutions themselves, experimentation should exist in all forms, and there should be no strong stigma against particular institutional permutations. Perhaps one of the greatest developments within empirical social sciences in recent decades has been the so-called “credibility revolution” in econometrics<ref>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Credibility_revolution</ref>. This shift has been primarily characterized by a move towards causal analysis in macro-level areas where experimentation was historically viewed as impossible or untenable. Since the credibility revolution, there has been a marked rise in the use of natural experiments within economics, although unfortunately passing by other fields such as sociology<ref>https://statsandsociety.substack.com/p/the-credibility-revolution-is-passing</ref>. Natural experiments refer to situations in which the conditions necessary for an experiment to normally be conducted – namely, a control group and an experimental group – are organically arrived at through exogenous changes to only one of two comparable groups. This has led to a significant increase in the certainty social scientists can have about the causal effects of particular phenomena.

This type of experimentation should be done consciously by policymakers, as it allows for a greater understanding of which institutional and political arrangements are best to promote human flourishing. One area where experimentation can be particularly useful is with democratic institutions, or institutions concerned with how governance is done. Such institutions have generally not evolved at the same pace that progress has been made in other domains, such as technology. While markets are typically considered effective ways to organize goods and services, as previously discussed mixed markets are ultimately preferable, and there is no reason to dogmatically hold to market-based systems if they are shown to not be effective in achieving this end. Similarly, there should not be a dogma in favor of fully democratic institutions, whatever such a thing would even mean, if they are not shown to be as effective in ensuring effective societal progress and governance.

While democracy has traditionally been said to be “by the people, for the people”, if the two conflict, we should generally support having a state which is governed for the people, rather than a state which is governed by the people. We must always remember that consequences are what matter in governance, and inputs only matter insofar as the outputs they produce. Countries such as Singapore have shown that a country can have relatively undemocratic institutions while also having effective governance and quality of life, and there is some evidence to suggest that many countries in the west are at a level of democracy beyond what is optimal for maximizing economic growth<ref>https://www.amazon.ca/10-Less-Democracy-Should-Elites/dp/1503603571</ref>.

The second principle with regards to institutional and cultural progress, which must be understood, is something which has been mentioned previously, but should be discussed in more detail here. It is that progress is not intrinsically tied to time. Systems which are old can be progressive, and new systems can be anti-progressive. Producing positive feedback loops which lead to progressive improvements can be more difficult in the context of culture relative to other areas, at least in the short run. In the long run, societal growth can gradually lead to pressures for culturally lagging societies to catch up to others, even if not by direct threat then by envy. As a result, we should not expect that indexes of developments in culture according to time would be a useful indicator of their progressiveness, as there can be significant noise, particularly in the short-run.

A significant tradeoff which presents itself in the context of open societies, particularly with regards to culture, is between progress and cohesion. Greater progress happens when there is greater room for experimentation and the capacity for cultures to change, even rapidly change. While that can be great for improving cultures in the long-run, in the short-run it can destroy social cohesion, as the undermining of cultures can cause substantial harm to many people.

One thing which must always be remembered is that while progressive systems in theory offer continual self-improvement, which implies change, that does not mean that change is intrinsically good. Especially in the context of culture, there are often good reasons for why certain norms exist as they do. They are oftentimes long-standing, tried-and-true ways for people to relate with one another in communities, which creates significant value which was only arrived at through evolutionary processes themselves. Attempts to deconstruct many cultures can ultimately be damaging if not carefully considered, and not merely damaging to social cohesion but also for broad prosperity in other dimensions.

As stated previously, gene-culture co-evolution is a very common phenomenon which has become incredibly important over the past 5,000 years or so as evolution and technological progress have accelerated. Thus, while there can be experimentation in areas such as culture, in the case of culture especially, it should generally be done at smaller scales and through piecemeal reforms, recognizing that older systems may exist for a reason a-la Chesterton’s fence<ref>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/G._K._Chesterton#Chesterton's_fence</ref>.

An excellent example of this is the presence of gender, which gives people a strong sense of purpose and meaning, even if it can constrain behavior in unfair ways sometimes. Monogamy has been a particularly effective social norm which generally involves complementary gender roles to at least a fluid degree, providing cohesion, societal stability, and assisting with the effective raising of children. Monogamous societies have generally been more economically progressive, because the family is the bedrock of a strong society<ref>https://royalsocietypublishing.org/rstb/article-abstract/367/1589/657/21759/The-puzzle-of-monogamous-marriageReview-Puzzling?redirectedFrom=fulltext</ref><ref>https://link.springer.com/article/10.1186/s12884-021-04301-7</ref><ref>https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/0022002719859636?__cf_chl_f_tk=IAouTCtYpSJh1qeygWaSkzNQmuMhukdGnhaY6YJ8tqo-1782962954-1.0.1.1-QqzBLTKy_8cuUK.LwFjrvfz4JGEWWoZ42K4f3nn5bF8</ref>. Cultural and technological developments which have undermined it, such as those associated with the sexual revolution, as well as the rise of no-fault divorce, have ultimately led to an undermining of familial norms, which harms children and societal prosperity more broadly.

Attempts to question something as fundamental as gender roles should always be done with care, and if one wants to try alternative modalities it should generally be done at a small scale, and if possible, in areas where children are not directly involved. There are thus tradeoffs and conflicts which necessarily present themselves with regards to institutional and cultural progress. However, this is similar to the reality of technology. While technology has been disruptive and harmful, that does not mean that we shouldn’t encourage technological progress and innovation. Furthermore, it does not mean that such progress does not come with significant benefits. After all, gene-culture co-evolution implies that cultures have evolved significantly, and more recent cultural arrangements can in many cases be invaluable in producing high-quality economic and social outcomes compared to cultural arrangements of previous eras.

We thus must have cultural diversity to some degree, even if it comes at the expense of social cohesion temporarily, as that is how progress is to occur. Nonetheless, efforts should be taken to ensure that it does as little harm to others as possible, through ensuring that ambitious cultural and institutional reforms are piecemeal, small-scale, and non-disruptive to the broader society until they have been shown to work, allowing for freedom of association in the process.

## Biological Progress in Contemporary Society

I have previously mentioned that the common dichotomy made between idealism and materialism as the only mechanisms by which societal change can be explained is a false one. We have thus far discussed intellectual progress, which encompasses an idealistic way of viewing the world, as well as technological, institutional, and cultural progress, which encompasses a materialistic way of viewing the world. However, we have not discussed biological progress, which encompasses a biorealistic way of viewing the world.

While not much attention is placed on the genetics or biology of people in popular discourse, it is clear, as has been discussed extensively throughout this text, that genetics and biology matter. They can determine social outcomes for individuals and groups, they affect how well humans can adapt to certain environments, and they can significantly affect people’s well-being. For example, in a world in which technologies exist that undermine social interaction, such a world would be relatively less progressive if humans were naturally more social animals, and relatively more progressive if humans were not. Interactions between people’s biology and their environment are crucial to understand when discussing how progress is to occur.

Just because one does not care about genetics does not mean that genetics does not care about us. Humans have been continuously evolving, and these patterns can be positive or negative depending upon the traits which are selected for. In pre-industrial societies, infant mortality was extremely high. This meant that selection mechanisms primarily concerned the ability to survive. However, with the rise of medical technologies which caused infant mortality to plummet, and for virtually all humans born to reach maturity, the primary selection mechanism by which change can occur is with differential reproduction. Whether people are able and willing to pair up and reproduce with one another, and who ultimately does, is what will predict future genetic evolution of human populations.

While significant debates can be had over what should or should not be done regarding this reality, it seems clear that people would care about what traits this differential fertility selects for. For example, if it organically ends up selecting in favor of intelligence, such an outcome would be preferable to one where it organically ends up selecting against intelligence, ceteris paribus. So is there any genetic selection currently going on? Research done into polygenic scores for various traits suggests that genetic traits which predict higher cognitive ability are being selected against, while traits which reflect high time preference behaviors such as ADHD are being selected for<ref>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/361797770_Human_Capital_Mediates_Natural_Selection_in_Contemporary_Humans</ref>. This means that future generations will likely be more impulsive, less willing to save in the long-run, which is very bad for economic growth, may be more criminal, and will be less innovative. The effects of these selection mechanisms are often shown to be relatively small<ref>https://www.cspicenter.com/p/are-we-getting-dumber</ref>. However, with them compounding over time, they could have substantial deleterious consequences, ultimately rendering this an anti-progressive trend.

This opens the question as to what degree attempts to engineer reproductive outcomes are justified or not. From a policy perspective, it should be noted that present policies do have non-neutral effects on reproductive outcomes, either intentionally or unintentionally. Intentionally, this happens through laws against incest, which are generally justified on the basis that incestuous relations lead to the creation of children with severe genetic defects. Unintentionally, this happens through allowing and in some cases even subsidizing birth control and abortions. Given that virtually any study done on relative use of birth control shows that some people are more likely to use it than others, the genetic effects of such policies will not be neutral. It seems that, at least in extreme cases, legal restrictions on reproduction can be justified.

It should be noted that even if deleterious genetic changes were not occurring, it still would not be the case that attempts to improve the genetic “quality” of people would be bad. This is because there could be opportunity costs associated with not doing it, or gains which are being ignored. In general, biological progress in the form of affecting population genetics should be libertine in nature, and should primarily be focused upon educating people about genetics and the importance of making good decisions, as well as providing access to reproductive technologies which can empower people to make such decisions.

In the coming decades, it is likely that we will be able to directly change people’s genetics through wider access to embryo selection, a technology which is already entering markets<ref>https://www.npr.org/2026/05/06/nx-s1-5704317/genetic-embryo-screening</ref>, as well as genetic engineering more broadly. Open access to this will help to solve problems of dysgenics, and open the door for direct biological progress to occur. However, even in the absence of direct genetic changes, environmental changes to people's biology can be beneficial through the expansion of medical technology. Such technology has significantly reduced infant mortality, and while that has come with challenges, it is still ultimately a progressive development.

With both types of biological progress, there will undoubtedly be issues which will arise, including a type of “genetic” mismatch, which can refer to mismatch between a person’s biology and their external environment when the biology was not arrived at through direct adaptation with the environment, or when there is mismatch between various aspects of an organism. These are risks associated with both exogenous, environmental changes to biological aspects of a person, as well as with genetic engineering technology, and there should be serious conversations about to what degree such interventions can be justified, including with cosmetic surgeries, surgeries aimed to express more extreme gendered aspects in one direction or another, and general transhumanist modifications.

However, the net long-run benefits will significantly exceed these costs as long as they are carefully considered. These technologies have the potential to in the future significantly improve traits of future generations, such as intelligence, which will generate positive externalities to society everywhere, improving competence, innovation, and the quality of institutions and cultures.

The core challenge with some aspects of biological progress is that, on the surface, it appears difficult to ethically and practically justify measures to promote it. However, in reality, many of these measures are already implemented explicitly or implicitly, and there are many libertine means by which these types of changes can be done, which would ultimately be beneficial for society without imposing unfair restrictions on individuals.

## Progress and Democracy

While the fact that political institutions should continually be experimented upon, and the empirical finding that high-income countries are likely at a level of democracy above what is optimal for economic growth, it is worth going into more detail on political decision-making, as that is fundamentally what structures the rest of society.

One thing which should be recognized is that governance today is not as democratic as one might initially predict. There is substantial evidence suggesting that the wealthy have disproportionate influence on policy outcomes – suggesting that substantively speaking, present democratic systems do not grant individuals an equality of influence relative to one another<ref>https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/perspectives-on-politics/article/testing-theories-of-american-politics-elites-interest-groups-and-average-citizens/62327F513959D0A304D4893B382B992B</ref>. Beyond substantive forces which lead societies to be less democratic, there are also laws on the books which prevent an equality of influence between individuals. For example, virtually all democracies institute a voting age requirement, effectively disenfranchising a significant proportion of the population. Some democracies also disenfranchise people on the basis of felony status, preventing felons from having the same voting rights of others.

Finally, many fundamental aspects of governance are completely cut off from the general will of the people. Perhaps the most extreme example of a completely undemocratic institution which exists in practically all wealthy countries is central banks. It is commonly said that central banks are “independent”, but this is simply a euphemism for the fact that central banks are completely undemocratic in their management. Rather than those who run central banks being appointed by democratically elected officials, functioning as a form of indirect democracy through representation, appointments are made meritocratically. The decisions of central banks are made through a combination of expert judgment and statistical modelling, rather than being up to the whims of the general population indirectly.

And this way of managing monetary policy, a fundamental aspect to economic governance, is seen as completely fine. Research has consistently shown that independent central banks perform better in achieving macroeconomic stability relative to banks which are run democratically<ref>https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/fandd/issues/Series/Back-to-Basics/Monetary-Policy</ref>. This is largely due to the fact that voters exhibit high time preference, meaning that they will naturally prefer impulsive actions which do not provide for a stable inflationary environment, undermining long-run economic growth in the process.

A related instance of a completely undemocratic institution which is nonetheless fundamental to governance is judiciaries. An independent judiciary de facto has been shown to be related to stronger economic growth<ref>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S017626800300017X</ref>, because it allows for people to be equally protected under the law, ensuring impartiality in governance, and providing for more social and economic stability.

In these cases, expert judgment has been shown to outperform the judgment of voters, which comes down to a number of factors, including differences in education and cognitive ability, as well as a greater emphasis on the importance of pragmatic functionality in political decision-making, rather than adherence to abstract political principles or ideologies. The combination of expert judgment with statistical methods as employed by independent central banking allows for stronger political decisions than would be made otherwise.

Many people suggest that democratic systems are analogous to market systems, and thus provide for effective positive feedback loops in the quality governance that would be difficult to achieve otherwise. There is some truth to this, in that individuals are providing feedback about the quality of their governance through the process of voting, in a similar way to how consumer decisions provide feedback loops which increase the quality of products sold on the market. However, there are several ways in which these are not analogous.

Firstly, whereas product markets provide a distinct and clear good through direct purchase, the most analogous behavior to this in democratic systems is voting, which does not provide a clear or guaranteed good. An individual purchasing a product will always get what they purchased, and that good will generally be what they expected it to be. However, in voting systems where the voter base becomes large, the marginal probability of an individual voter swaying an election decision approaches zero. Thus, the actual payoff of voting in terms of getting a desired policy outcome is effectively zero. This reality has been commonly referred to as the “paradox of voting”<ref>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paradox_of_voting</ref>, as the fact that the policy outcome benefit of voting is approximately zero, and the cost of voting in terms of time and effort is non-zero, implies that rational individuals should not vote at all. In addition, unlike the case of a product market, where the product you purchase is generally what you expect it to be, in the case of voting the outcome expected from voting is highly uncertain. If a person is voting for a candidate in a representative democracy, there is inevitably going to be a substantial to high degree of uncertainty about the behavior of that candidate if they were to be elected. Even if their behavior and policy decisions were completely known, the actual effects of those decisions are going to be uncertain.

Rather than democratic voting systems being analogized to decisions over private goods, they are better understood as decisions over common goods, which are rivalrous but non-excludable<ref>https://thewaywardaxolotl.blogspot.com/2015/05/democracy-is-tragedy-of-commons.html</ref>. This is because (theoretically) anyone can vote in a democratic system, but these votes have conflicting effects on the votes of others. Due to the paradox of voting, the primary benefit that people get from voting is not actually in terms of personal benefits to themselves from policy. Virtually any investigation into the behavior of voters shows that voters do not vote on the basis of their own personal interests<ref>https://www.amazon.ca/Elephant-Brain-Hidden-Motives-Everyday/dp/0190495995</ref>. Rather, the primary benefit from voting, consistent with the fact that people do not care about policy outcomes in practice, is in terms of expressive value. People vote to signal their adherence to a party or to broad principles in a society, which allows them to gain higher status.

The problem with this emphasis on status over effective policymaking is that this leads to individuals not valuing the truth, but this lack of care about truth is a fact about human nature. Practically all examinations into human psychology have shown that humans are not agents who attempt to neutrally arbitrate what is true about the world. Rather, we come with a wide range of cognitive biases, which are amplified in group contexts where pressures can actively cause individuals to believe or act upon false ideas.

Historically, politics has been oriented around one of two objects: either the promotion of particular personalities, or the ritualistic adherence to abstract ideologies. While adherence to ideologies is generally more preferable to adherence to particular personalities, in part as it provides more stability and predictability to governance, both of these approaches ultimately undermine the ability for effective governance to be done. Ideologies can provide useful heuristics about what policy prescriptions are preferable, and I do not believe that all ideologies are made equal. However, when taken too seriously, adherence to ideology can cause harm and suboptimal political organization. The problem with ideologies as they exist is not necessarily that their individual prescriptions are wrong, but that through their general hostility to revision and continual experimentation they are categorically opposed to the discovery of truth and merely function as ways in which people can find meaning.

I am thus in favor of an anti-political type of politics. Politics must ultimately move away from attachment to particular personalities or abstractions which, at best, only approximately correspond to people’s actual real-world well-being. The focus should ultimately be on examining cause and effect of political decisions where possible, particularly through the use of data which allows for net predictions to be made and helps to filter out cognitive biases which may otherwise distort one’s decisions. This allows for pragmatism to dominate in political decision-making as opposed to less progressive means of engaging in political decisions.

In practice, this means that politics in the real world should be considered much less important than it presently is. This does not mean that there is no room for politics. However, political disagreements must be treated with less hostility, and emphasis must be put away from ideologies and political figures in favor of pure pragmatism. Still, while we can move closer towards this ideal compared to where we are now, it is not fully achievable. Fundamentally, many of the political debates which do occur emerge on grounds which cannot simply be solved through data analysis, but require a more holistic and philosophical understanding of what progress is. The degree to which this inevitably presents itself in political debates is heavily exaggerated by many who wish to be intellectually lazy, as it allows disagreements to be reduced to much simpler axioms, but it nonetheless can present itself in some cases, particularly in the context of many social issues, where unlike economic issues, there can be immense disagreement over what outcomes are even preferable. Even when there is agreement over the preferability of some outcomes relative to others, the human tendency to hyper-personalize social issues as opposed to economic issues which are viewed as more abstract can lead to irrationality in decision-making.

This de-politicized politics should be emphasized, particularly in those economic areas. Technocratic decision-making can probably be extended to more domains than it is now, including taxation policy and much of fiscal policy. However, there are many areas where, at least currently, it can present significant risk. Academia as it exists today, which is inhabited by experts, has become a closed system, particularly with regards to issues which are within the domain of social progressivism. This is because of the human tendency to view such issues with far more irrationality than other issues. It is in these domains where expert judgment becomes a significantly worse assessment over what is good policy or whether something is true, and as such should be treated with significantly more skepticism.

This ultimately means that many aspects of policy will have to be done through democratic means, even when there is a case for more technocratic decision-making broadly than is being done presently. As a general rule, technocratic decision-making is better in areas where data analysis is easier, where the values which go into decision-making are fewer, better defined, and more transparent, and where there is no epistemic corruption among experts in the domain.

While many of these concepts are extensions of what has already been tried and proven to be effective, some of the specific prescriptions made here are things which have not been tried previously to any extensive degree. It must always be remembered that when making reforms to systems, they should be done in a piecemeal fashion, on a small scale, and in contexts where conditions resembling experiments are achieved. This allows for a progressive understanding of what tends to work and what doesn’t, which ensures that progress is achieved. I do not believe that the reforms I suggest here should be implemented tomorrow. They should be viewed as a stepping stone for how to potentially reconsider and improve political institutions, as a way to open the door for more conversations about how to further institutional progress past where it has already gone.

There have already been tests done on minor instances of more technocratic or meritocratic reforms. For example, some research has been done comparing appointed to elected city treasurers, a minor but important position, suggesting that appointed treasurers are generally more fiscally responsible in ways which are beneficial to city borrowing costs<ref>https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1533676</ref>. This is a good step towards experimentation, and further efforts should occur in this way. These efforts should be framed in terms of “appointments” and “independent political institutions”, due to the fact that there is a strong stigma against open advocacy against democratizing political institutions – despite this being something extremely commonplace in virtually all industrialized societies.

Fundamentally, progressive systems are not inherently democratic. Markets are fundamentally undemocratic to a strong degree, as they do not grant all individuals equal decision-making in how the economy is run. Those who are wealthier than others have greater capacity to influence economic outcomes through various financial decisions, whether it be the purchasing of products, or investment. Firms, which are the fundamental unit by which economic production occurs, are fundamentally undemocratic in their nature. Workers do not generally have a say in how businesses are run, and worker cooperative models of businesses where this does happen are known to have a host of problems which make them a poor model for the whole economy to adopt<ref>https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/9781405165518.wbeosm020</ref> – which is why they have not organically emerged as an efficient mode of production within market economies. Markets do have some democratic elements to them, but these are not the only feedback loops which exist in capitalistic economic systems, and there are others including meritocratic decision-making. Just as markets are not fully democratic, we should not expect our political system to necessarily be either.

## Progress, Purpose, and Beauty

The presentation of an alternative view of progress, thus far, can appear unappealing and unsatisfying to the average person, especially in the current cultural climate where some topics mentioned are highly taboo. People who are interested in politics very often treat it as an existential battle, something which ought to give people a profound life mission, and something which is fundamentally religious in nature. Many political ideologies view themselves at the centre of a conflict they will inevitably win, with a level of unearned self-righteousness which comes for merely having convictions without reason. There is nothing rational about this from the perspective of creating a state that will promote human flourishing, but this is not the psychological purpose of politics for people. As previously shown, the neurological correlates of politics and religion share a lot of overlap. Politics is not about truth. Politics is merely religion, with ideologies being various flavors of religion.

This reality can have extremely dangerous consequences for civilization. In small communities, where people lived in the prehistoric era, the amount of information needed to make essential decisions was significantly smaller. As such, it was much easier for an individual to know everything that was needed to make proper decisions, thus, disagreements on the basis of value judgments became significantly more salient. In this sense, religious values may have provided less harm, as there was less capacity for them to inhibit people’s ability to learn or integrate new and relevant information due to the simple lack of it. Furthermore, with a single small group which is continuously in conflict with other tribes, it can be adaptive to have an “us versus them” mentality against other tribes, allowing the ingroup to maintain a strong cohesion which can be used to protect itself either proactively or reactively in group conflicts.

However, in larger-scale civilizations where groups are not actually in existential conflict with one another, these ideologies can be extremely damaging and lead to extreme conflict. One of the most damaging aspects of this type of religious thinking as applied to politics is the fixation on dubious oppression narratives, something which social progressivism is partly guilty of, although is not exclusive to that ideology. Contrary to the assertions of many social progressives, who suggest that the primary way in which genocide or group conflict is propagated through the conscious acknowledgement of biological group differences, a belief they use to justify censorship of research which undermines their presuppositions, the real cause is actually a view that one’s group is being unfairly put upon<ref>https://humanrights.ca/story/what-led-genocide-against-tutsi-rwanda</ref><ref>https://encyclopedia.ushmm.org/content/en/article/antisemitism</ref>.

Plenty of instances exist where people acknowledge the existence of difference on an individual or group level without it delving into violence, such as differences between individuals, or differences between families. Such differences do not imply superiority or justifications for political violence or genocide. Even in cases where people generally view a group difference as a form of superiority, such as the distinction between humans and non-human animals, this does not justify an attempt to genocide that outgroup. Most people, while they care less about animal suffering than human suffering, they do not have an intrinsic hostility towards animals and are generally opposed to or uncomfortable with the non-instrumental killing of animals.

Humans are not naturally genocidal, but need to be given a reason to be, and the core reason that humans generally have to be given to justify and be willing to engage in a genocide is the belief that the other group constitutes an existential threat through their oppression against the ingroup. Such oppression narratives can take a number of forms, and even when they do not necessarily lead to genocide, they generally cause significant harm in the process. For the Nazis, the belief was that Jews were oppressing Germans. In the Rwandan genocide, the belief was that the Tutsis were oppressing the Hutus. In the Soviet Union, the belief was that the capitalists were oppressing the working class. While social progressivism today does not have the same level of violent tendencies as these other instances have displayed, their insistence upon disparities between ethnic and gender groups being solely reducible to oppression at the very least significantly undermined social cohesion within society today, which can risk destabilization.

These narratives can be extremely dangerous, but they give people a sense of purpose that they may otherwise lack. For most of human history, religion in a literal theistic sense provided people with a very strong sense of purpose. With industrialization and various scientific advances, religion became impossible to rationally justify. The texts which people would adhere to, which provided various answers for where humans came from, what happens after we die, and how the world works, had claims which were gradually undermined through the progression of our understanding of the world. Industrialization and intellectual progress necessitated the gradual decline of religion, but this decline created an absence of meaning which was difficult to fill.

It is not a coincidence that the people with the strongest cardinal preferences in politics, such as leftists and radical idealogues<ref>https://www.richardhanania.com/p/why-is-everything-liberal</ref>, tend to be the least religious people. Ideology, in many cases, provides people with a strong replacement for the meaning they could have otherwise gotten through religion. Religious systems, theistic or otherwise, can be very adaptive, as they are embedded into human psychology. However, they are dangerous when invoked in the contemporary political realm.

The rise of interconnectivity through social media and internet technologies has not been helpful on this front. These technologies have fundamentally transformed the ways in which status hierarchies are made, through increasing the importance and salience of exhibitionism as a means to attain status. Through this, a need to publicly profess socially popular viewpoints or things which are attention grabbing, takes more precedence than ever, and increases the salience of ideology as a way to give people a sense of meaning. If one is socially rewarded more than ever for professing a particular ideology, as social media does, then ideology will become ever more important in the lives of people. Technology has made the problem of maladaptive belief systems ever greater.

I argue against ideology, but this necessarily presents a challenge: How do people have a sense of purpose within society? If religion is inevitably proven to be false, and ideologies are destructive, how can people be provided with a sense of purpose that allows for intellectual and societal progress and allows for long-lasting, sustainable societies? Ultimately, this will have to come from two directions. The first direction is one away from the political realm, and the second is one in the political realm which is nonetheless progressive. With regards to the first one, which will be more important and relevant for the vast majority of people, there will need to be a greater emphasis placed on interpersonal social relations, which include local communities and family. While technologies such as the internet, and even transportation such as cars, have made local communities much more difficult to establish and maintain, there needs to be further efforts put in these directions to help foster social cohesion in the private realm.

As previously stated, freedom of association can allow for a greater capacity for cultural diversity to emerge, allowing for more opportunities for social arrangements which foster greater cohesion within communities. There needs to be an understanding that these are much less harmful and much more fulfilling ways to find purpose in society. Ideology, in a sense, is fundamentally lazy. It takes little effort to publicly profess adherence to a particular ideology, to signal that you have the “correct” ideas. It’s much more challenging and much more indicative of a person’s character when they build community, and help others in much more concrete ways. As a society, we should reward these types of behaviors much more than we reward ideologues.

Family formation should also be put forward as a crucial means by which purpose can be created. Industrialization has come with a shift in family structures across cultures, which has led to a decline in family formation. Furthermore, the sexual revolution has made it increasingly difficult to form families, due to a change in legal and sexual norms. In a sense, family is the ultimate way in which someone can find a sense of meaning in their lives, as it involves the creation of children, who bring forth a legacy that goes on after one dies, and something to care for that is beyond oneself and more important than oneself. It is these means of finding purpose that are crucial to establish, which will require a shift in cultural, legal, and institutional norms to help promote.

The promotion of experimentation and freedom of association will allow for greater diversity in ways which people attempt to approach the problem of a lack of purpose, which will allow for these issues to be progressively experimented on and figured out. This will create an explosion of creativity in all sorts of ways, including an additional area where profound purpose can be found: art and beauty. It’s been commonly observed that in many areas, such as music, there has been a decline in quality. It seems that despite significant advances in technology, which expand the possibilities for creative expression, these have not actually been taken advantage of to even close to the extent which they could have been. Cultural diversity and open societies allow for a flourishing of artistic movements which would not have existed otherwise.

All of these are areas outside of politics where purpose can be found, but I assert that there is still some purpose to be found within politics. At the very least, the transition to this ideal state over time will require a motivated set of individuals who are committed to the ideas outlined here – thus functioning as a form of purpose in a sense. What norms are necessary in this, and are there religious norms which can be pro-progressive?

I believe that there are, and they include the following: heroism, adventurism, courage, and competence. Progress in many cases requires significant self-sacrifice, whether it be devoting one’s life to an intellectual pursuit, or to making incredible innovations, or other related areas. This requires heroism, or a willingness to pursue things which are more important and greater than oneself. It requires courage and adventurism, as it requires going beyond what has been done, and having the temperamental willingness to take risks. Finally, it requires competence, as competence is behind all great innovations. Values such as these need to be culturally promoted as much as possible, as they are both compatible with providing a sense of purpose without undermining progress. They should also be integrated strongly with movements in technology, arts, and culture, and projects from progressive movements should explicitly be done in the name of this form of progress.

A particularly saddening cultural development in the west over the last century has been a decline in high culture. Whereas grand, large-scale, and risky artistic projects were commonplace in the 19th and early 20th centuries, including the Statue of Liberty and Eiffel Tower, such projects have largely declined in western countries, which have lost a large sense of identity. I argue that progressive movements must not simply be focused on technical societal management, but also fundamental human emotions such as beauty. One simple example is the reintroduction of large public works projects, something which is presently being taken up in other parts of the world such as East Asia. There should be continual attempts to merge progress with beauty in the creation of grand projects, with inspiration potentially being taken from architecture such as the Marina Bay Sands in Singapore, or the Statute of Unity in India.

In creating a positive, public vision for the future, there should also be a willingness to honor efforts made in the past by people who fought for this alternative vision of progress, explicitly or implicitly. This provides a sense of purpose for people, who see the current direction of society as something which is not divorced from a rich history, and who see inspiration for what may be possible in the future. It also helps to legitimize this alternative vision of progress through framing historical victories in various dimensions as victories under the name of this idea. A simple way in which this is done is through statues and other ways of publicly and conspicuously honoring certain figures. These figures should generally include people who made radical developments to intellectual progress or other areas of progress, and adopted aforementioned progressive virtues such as heroism, adventurism, courage, and/or sacrifice. There should be a strong emphasis placed on the value that these figures provided through questioning existing societal norms and being willing to look outside of them, despite the potential social or reputational costs associated with it. This type of implementation of progressive values would give life to the ideas, and provide people with a vision and incentive to improve things, as there is now a sense of glory and reward that people have for doing what is necessary to bring humanity forward.

Finally, this positive vision of progress can come with radical types of exploration in other domains which have not necessarily been detailed here. While progress as outlined here generally concerns direct means to promote human flourishing, there are many other developments which may have not had an immediate effect on people’s quality of life, but nonetheless were positive because they helped foster a sense of pride and identity among people. One example of this is the space race in the mid-20th century, which ultimately led to significant advances in various technologies and the consequences of which were hugely defining to the lives of millions. There are plenty of domains where this type of technological development and exploration can occur in the 21st century, whether it be public attempts to further explore space, the establishment of permanent settlements on previously unpopulated or underpopulated areas such as Greenland or Antarctica, or exploration of the deep sea which is almost completely unexplored. These are not meant to be particular projects which I am absolutely advocating should happen, but they allow for further ideas to be developed which can create tangible public projects which boost people’s morale and sense of identity, allowing them to be further attached to this non-ideological view of progress.

The question of how to integrate progress with a sense of purpose is a difficult one, and this text has primarily been arguing against various ways in which people have derived a sense of purpose, most notably ideology. However, purpose is crucial towards human flourishing, and it can be integrated with progress more broadly if it is carefully considered.

## Reprise

Thus far, the text has overviewed a very large number of concepts which may feel confused and disconnected with one another. It is worth summarizing and clarifying what exactly I am proposing here in terms of a worldview, one which I label as “Post-Progressivism”, and will refer to as such throughout this section. Post-Progressivism takes as its aim the promotion of progress, conceptualizing it not in terms of the literal progression of time, nor in narrow domains such as the expansion of the moral circle or technological progress in itself, but in terms of the promotion of human flourishing. All forms of social organization must have human flourishing as the thing they ultimately promote. Otherwise, they cannot be regarded as progressive.

Human flourishing is inherently multidimensional, and involves a careful balance of a multitude of goods. At the core, it is about promoting health and well-being in the present and in the long-run for future generations, in ways which are consistent with our underlying moral intuitions. Human flourishing involves a pluralistic view of consequentialism, whereby the moral obligation of individuals is first to the self and then to others to varying degrees based on genetic and relational proximity. In achieving this, human survival and reproduction are crucial, after which concrete ends which are necessary to achieve this are important, including social cohesion, material prosperity, and institutional quality, after which the means by which these are achieved are important, such as a commitment to truth, promotion of competence, and the production of knowledge, and after which other lesser values can come to the fray. Politics ought to fundamentally be treated as a set of optimization problems, whereby tradeoffs are recognized, continually experimented with, and continually negotiated.

The Post-Progressivist view of progress can be divided into three parts, consistent with the three ways in which historical phenomena can be explained: intellectual progress, environmental progress, and biological progress. Intellectual progress refers to ways in which our knowledge of the world is expanded, allowing for the greater capacity to promote human flourishing. Environmental progress refers to ways in which environmental factors, whether they be technological, institutional, or cultural, can help to promote human flourishing. Finally, biological progress refers to ways in which humans can be modified, physically, psychologically, or even genetically, to bring about further human flourishing.

Post-Progressivism aims to develop the means by which progress in all of these dimensions can be organically fulfilled, melding evolutionary principles into all three dimensions of progress wherever possible. For evolutionary principles to be effectively applied in any domain, there must be a degree of variation in permutations of what is being examined, as well as effective selection mechanisms to ensure that better permutations eventually dominate. In terms of technology and related fields, markets generally allow for this, so long as the proper institutional and regulatory structure is present. In terms of ideas, freedom of speech allows for variation while effective experimentation, market institutions, and competitive intellectual institutions allow for effective selection mechanisms. In practice, progress requires open societies and continual experimentation in all domains.

Historically and presently, politics has been primarily oriented around group loyalty or adherence to abstract ideologies. These ultimately inhibit progress through focusing excessively on ideals or personality cults, ignoring pragmatic functionality in the process. Politics should fundamentally be about experimentation, empiricism, and openness, all in the absence of ideological dogmas which characterize politics today. It should, fundamentally, be an anti-political type of politics.

Values which are essential to promote under Post-Progressivism are those which allow for effective governance as well as general openness. These include, among others, the promotion of competence. Competence in government and markets is essential, and even though its promotion will inevitably lead to inequality along a large number of dimensions, that is not necessarily a bad thing. Abstractions which characterize popular ideologies of today, including equality, fraternity, and liberty, which have their place, should not be viewed as end goals in themselves.

In the political realm, this means the promotion of technocratic politics where possible, including in areas where it is already present such as monetary policy, and extending towards other domains. Technocratic politics works to optimize outcomes in a policy domain when four conditions are met: The outcomes are few in number, they are well-defined, they are measurable, and they are transparent. In cases where these are less well met, more democratic modes of organization may be preferable, although steps should be taken to ensure that democratic politics privileges competence, whether it be through ensuring that those with greater competence have greater say, or whether it be through the promotion of high culture and a high knowledge floor in order to properly understand contemporary political debates.

Ideologies have given people a strong sense of purpose and cohesion, despite their limitations in the pursuit of truth or good governance, and appear to have gained prominence over the past two centuries in part because of a decline in religion. While returning to religion is neither feasible nor desirable, as it did suffer from similar limitations to ideologies, there needs to be an attempt to give people a sense of purpose outside of politics, which has become all-defining in the lives of people in a way which is ultimately damaging to civilization. This has to come from a greater emphasis on private community and family, something which will necessitate cultural and legal reforms to achieve. In this process, new religions which do not suffer from the problems of older ones may prove valuable.

Post-Progressivism must also frame itself in a meaningful way, through promoting adventurism, heroism, and curiosity. All successes of civilizations, past and present, must be reframed in Post-Progressive terms. There should be attempts to venerate those who have contributed to progress in the past, and there needs to be the reintroduction of ambitious projects and journeys which can establish Post-Progressivism as an anti-political, but simultaneously meaningful, worldview.

While this text has laid out Post-Progressivism in broad strokes, it is up to new thinkers and innovators to lay out what this will mean in practice. No worldview can come from a single individual, and just as my worldview has been influenced by countless individuals directly or indirectly, so will others have to take from this and develop their own ideas from it in order to create a successful alternative to the status quo. The challenge ahead is how to build true communities, intellectual and otherwise, that will help to begin this transformation of politics and civilization.

We need to figure out how to build up alternative institutions, particularly in the intellectual sphere which has largely become closed off to open dialogue and feedback. This will allow a vanguard of intellectuals to rise up who can help create this alternative vision, one which is worth fighting for and pursuing. It is only the vision of progress as outlined under post-progressivism, which is truly progressive, and other views must be reframed as conservative or reactionary in nature. Post-progressivism is not inevitable, and it is crucial that people actively embody their ideas and apply them in the social, cultural, and institutional realms.

## References

<references />
