---
layout: page
title: Religion
permalink: /religion/
---

**<u>Summary</u>**

This section deals with higher-level discussions of religion, which is incomplete without looking at information from [Understanding Religious Belief](https://prometheandissident.github.io/psychology/#understanding-religious-belief). I do not go through much of the theological arguments for religion, instead holding that religion is better understood as a psychological and sociological phenomenon, rather than reflecting something real and supernatural in the world. Arguments for religious belief, as far as I can tell, primarily either deal with the benefits associated with belief, or with unconvincing rationalizations of one's pre-existing prejudices. As such, while I doo briefly outline some reasons for why I hold religious belief to be irrational, not much time is devoted to it. Still, I go through numerous aspects of religion, including the connection between religion and moral belief, the validity of religious texts, the evolution of religion as a tree of life, as well as free will and prayer, two beliefs which are heavily connected with religious ideas. While religious belief is irrational, there are clear benefits to it, and dven though it should be done away with in the long-run, we should take religions as inspiration for how to create new communities and forms of meaning for people in the future.

## On the Descriptive Validity of Relgion

For the purposes of this article, I will define religion in a more narrow way than I have in various sections of my page on [Psychology](https://prometheandissident.github.io/psychology/), most notably in [Is Leftism a Religion?](https://prometheandissident.github.io/psychology/#is-leftism-a-religion?). In this article, I will define religion as an organized set of beliefs surrounding the supernatural, particularly with a belief in the existence of a god or gods at the center. Religions generally speaking come with a set of rituals and cultural norms which are bundled into a "package" of sorts, often with vast doctrines which directly come from or are inspired by a "religious" text of sorts. In the case of the Christians, this takes the form of the Bible, with Muslims it takes the form of the Quran, with Hinduism it's the Bhagavad Gita, and so on.

I hold that religions are generally speaking false and do not correspond to reality, and hence that religious belief is in a sense, irrational. I will discuss particular reasons for believing this later on, but I want to make my position clear when it comes to analyzing my views on religion as a cultural practice. As discussed in [The Sociobiology of Culture](https://prometheandissident.github.io/culture/#the-sociobiology-of-culture), culture serves a number of adaptive purposes for providing the community with cohesion and a set of norms which can help them survive. Religion should be viewed as something very similar, and while there are irrational parts of it, that doesn't mean that it cannot be adaptive. If the irrational beliefs are relatively costless and provide cohesive benefits, the benefits may outweigh the costs. Furthermore, if religions create dogmas which, while not rationally articulated, have good reasons for existing for a survival purpose, such as dietary restrictions, then other aspects of religion can directly aid survival beyond merely providing social cohesion. I thus want to take religion seriously as a cultural phenomena, even if I disagree with the major world religions and believe that they're false.

I don't think that it is possible to know whether a god exists or not. I don't think that there is strong evidence for supernatural phenomena being able to explain things which have happened in the scope of human history, but it is possible that the start of the universe had supernatural origins. While I subscribe to atheism, I hold that both an atheistic view as well as a deistic view (i.e. a supreme being created the universe but does not intervene in its ongoing affairs) are both rational possibilities to hold. I regard many of the supernatural prescriptions made about, for example, the existence of free will or of souls independent from a person's body as irrational as well. These criterion disqualify the major world religions as viewpoints I would consider rational/reasonable. I do not believe that they are likely to be true.

## On Purpose and Religion

Religion provides people with a major sense of purpose, giving people a package of a variety of things, including community, a reason for living, a moral code to live by, and more. In their book "The Elephant in the Brain", Kevin Smiler and Robin Hanson examine this from an evolutionary psychology perspective, documenting numerous ways in which religions provide community-level benefits. While many people assume that religious behavior can be explained by religious belief, they point out that this isn't true. Most religions do not care about private belief in the religion so long as people publicly accept it. Furthermore, in general, we have many practices which are devoid of supernatural beliefs but are said to have a religious element to them, such as reciting national anthems<ref>The Elephant in the Brain: Chapter 15</ref>.

Instead, religion creates cooperation between individuals through a variety of means. These include traditional means, such as gossip, monitoring, and punishment, but also has a few ones which are fairly unique to religions. The means of inducing and enforcing cooperation include the following<ref>The Elephant in the Brain: Chapter 15</ref>:

- Religions require people to make a number of personal sacrifices which signify loyalty to a group and acts as a way to pay one's dues to a group, including time, energy, status through acts of worship like kneeling and bowing, and even fertility in the case of high-ranking religious leaders who often have to take vows of celibacy.
- Religions take advantage of the fact that humans are hard-wired to form social bonds when moving in lockstep through the introduction of countless rituals involving synchronized movement of some kind.
- Sermons don't merely provide education, but also act as a ritual and signal of conformity by mere participation.
- Religions often have types of badges used to signify insiders from outsiders, and high-ranking members from low-ranking members.
- Supernatural beliefs can also be valuable. For example, in the case of an all-powerful, all-knowing deity, people who believe in such a god are more likely to behave well. They will be seen as more moral by others if they are believed to hold that belief, and one of the best ways to make others think you believe something is to believe it. Thus, belief in god helps increase social trust and good behavior in a community.
- The craziness of particular religious beliefs can be a barometer for how tightly held the community is, and how trusting it is. Stronger suppressions of common sense suggest that the community provides more value for its members.

Thus, religions, even though they have irrational beliefs, those beliefs can be beneficial to the community, and as shown in [Understanding Religious Belief](https://prometheandissident.github.io/psychology/#understanding-religious-belief), people tend to psychologically benefit from having religious beliefs. None of this should be used to suggest that religions are true. Religious beliefs can be false even if they are adaptive. However, it does suggest that there can be positives to religion, or at least certain aspects of it.


## On Morality and Religion

A big topic which is regularly brought up in religious circles is the relationship between morality and religion. There is a view which suggests that in the absence of the existence of a god, there is no grounding for an objective morality, and morality merely reduces to people's preferences. As such, morality can only be subjective and arbitrary in nature in the absence of a god.

I would subscribe to a moral non-cognitivist view, whereby morality is only the expression of preferences, and says nothing about what is true or false in the world. I view the objective-subjective morality debate as uninteresting, as it comes across as people pre-emptively trying to get others to agree with or adhere to their morality through mere wordplay. Rather than being a thing which is etched into the world, morality is an emergent consequence of humanity's need to act in social groups in order to survive (see [On Morality and Human Sociality](https://prometheandissident.github.io/psychology/#on-morality-and-human-sociality)). Morality only makes sense insofar as other people exist in a society who interact with one another, and is fundamentally negotiative in nature. Morality emerges due to common interests and it being from a game theoretic view in everyone's best interest to adhere to a set of norms. However, these norms/moral principles only matter insofar as they have teeth, or enforcement in some way. This enforcement must come in the form of a risk to one's survival interests, whether they be imposed by other members of or the rest of the group in the form of a punishment of some kind, minor or major, or through the natural negative consequences of an action carrying forth.

Given that morality is merely about enforcement, in a sense the presence of an all-powerful, all-knowing god would be able to establish a type of "objective" morality, in that there would be one uniform set of standards which everyone is functionally incentivized to adhere to. Even then, god's morality would only matter insofar as he enforced it in such a way that dissuaded people from violating it. If a god is enforcing morality on threat of eternal damnation following a person dying, while this may dissuade most people from committing "immoral" acts, it wouldn't dissuade people with an extremely high time preference or extremely short-sighted preferences. Functionally speaking however, there effectively would be one standard which everyone is heavily incentivized to follow.

In the absence of a god, it's much more difficult to enforce morality, as there is no threat of use of force by a god, or of eternal damnation as exists in many religions. In some sense, the gods of many religions were likely created for that precise purpose - to try and enforce a standard of morality through giving people a new set of information about the costs of defecting from that standard. However, this does not mean that it's impossible, or that therefore religion is true. A belief can be adaptive in a particular context without being true, after all.

## The Validity of Present-Day Religions

This section will overview a number of arguments for why, inductively speaking, present-day religions are likely false. A full comprehensive examination of every religion and every aspect of each religion is far beyond the scope of this article, but this will combine a number of ideas which lead me to the conclusion that present-day religions were most likely man-made and are false.

### Religious Texts

Religious texts regularly say pseudoscientific things which are easily disproven. A short list:

- The Bible describes the earth as being created in seven days, with an ordering of events which wouldn't make sense for what was created. For example, the book of Genesis says that god created vegetation on the third day, but the day and night cycle with the sun and moon on the fourth day. Plants cannot survive in the absence of the sun, meaning that god did not provide plants with what they need to grow prior to creating them.
- Furthermore, the Bible strongly suggests that the earth is 6,000 years old, which contradicts virtually all evidence on the subject. There are even clonal trees which are older than 6,000 years<ref>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_oldest_trees</ref>.
- Genesis also describes all living organisms as being popped into existence through divine creation, when we know that organisms evolved into their present states over millions of years and all share a common ancestor from billions of years ago.
- The existence of nephilism are also implied in Biblical texts, when there is no evidence for their existence
- Noah's flood is another event which is discussed in the bible, with no evidence of its existence.

Adherents of religion have, over time, said fewer erroneous things about the world. However, this is only through a progressive improvement of knowledge over time, which sometimes happened in opposition to religious doctrine and to the resistence of many religious adherents. Religious texts which are, in part or in whole, "divinely inspired" have practically never contributed new knowledge about science or medicine, and may have actually held some of it back to a degree through promoting false ideas about the world. Rather than questions which religion has tried to explain, such as the origin of life, the existence of weather or the wind, the age or origin of the universe, or more, converging towards explanations held in religious texts, they have consistently been explained through non-supernatural means in part or in whole. In other words, with more knowledge, the capacity for religion to reasponably explain the world has significantly declined.

Many religious people today assert that certain elements of their texts shouldn't be taken literally, such as creation stories in the Bible. While this does allow them to get away from blatantly erroneous aspect of their religion, it doesn't offer a good account of what should be taken literally versus what shouldn't be. If some stories are proven to be false in an allegedly holy book, then why should any part of the book be taken seriously? Why is a person's belief modified to only hold that some aspects of a book are holy, and how does one distinguish between what should versus what shouldn't be taken literally? Whenever one makes this distinction, it invariably appears post-hoc in nature, as if one is merely trying to hold onto as much of their religious preconceptions as possible without saying anything which blatantly absurd.

Another area where religious notions have become undermined is with the concept of a soul. Cognitive psychology and related fields have undermined the idea through demonstrating that virtually all aspects of our experience, whether it be our "will", memories, cognition, etc., are mediated by the brain. Rather than our consciousness being an immaterial thing which is merely a "ghost in the machine", our consciousness appears indistinguishable from our material being. Thus, there would be no reason to assume that our consciousness is independent from our brain, or that we live on after our material brain has stopped working.

### The Diverging Nature of Religion

Religion is best understood as having a divergent nature to it. With scientific theories and the like, over time multiple theories are proposed to explain a set of phenomena, but as theorizing and testing increases, explanations for that set of phenomena are expected to roughly converge. This doesn't have to happen, but it's the mark of a healthy and well-functioning scientific discipline if that's what occurs. However, religion does not function in this way, instead exhibiting a divergent quality. Rather than more time and evidence leading to religious viewpoints converging over time to a common truth, religious views have only split and diverged over time, adopting increasingly differentiated accounts of the world. This is why religions have often been classified according to tree diagrams<ref>https://the40foundation.org/world-religions-tree.html</ref>.

Imagine if a science exhibited a "tree" diagram. Rather than scientists converging upon a small set of explanations, imagine if scientific explanations of a particular phenomenon diverged. This would be viewed with great suspicion. It would certainly appear as if many people were being deliberately irrational in their thought, assuming that the phenomena is not incredibly complex as to warrant so many possible explanations. I hold that religion is, most likely, not as cognitively complex as most scientific disciplines today are, which is why people who study physics or mathematics are generally regarded as more intelligent than those who study religion. This suggests that the epistemic standards that people use to judge between religions are significantly worse than the epistemic standards scientists in areas such as physics or mathematics use to judge between differing theories.

The tree-like way which religion has emerged also implies that it is better understood as a type of "memetic" evolution as opposed to being a product of some legitimate observation of supernatural forces. It exhibits a similar appearance to a "tree of life", where organisms diversify over time to fulfill certain niches and adapt to particular contexts they are placed in. In the case of religion, it may be that the diverging nature of it serves analogous roles for people. However, no one would take from this the idea that a particular religion is some obvious truth which will inevitably be rationally and universally arrived upon because it's so obviously correct.

Religions ultimately cannot account for why people of other religions believe the things that they do. It is difficult to give psychological explanations for why people of certain religions are irrational in their belief, which would not apply to adherents of one's preferred set of religious beliefs. They can also struggle to distinguish what is rational about their religion which renders other religions irrational. In many cases, religions are merely inherited, rather than arrived at rationally. Despite religion having a substantial heritable component (see [Are Beliefs Genetic?](https://prometheandissident.github.io/psychology/#are-beliefs-genetic?)), a strong predictor of the religion one will believe in is what religion their community happens to have.

### On Religion and Free Will

The predominant view on free will amongst religious people is that it exists. In other words, people have the ability to act on their own will in a way that would be impossible to 100% accurately predict. However, given that people's brains predict their actions, and their brains operate according to the laws of physics, free will cannot exist. As discussed in [On Biological Determinism](https://prometheandissident.github.io/psychology/#on-biological-determinism), brain modelling is becoming able to predict future brain states, meaning that in the future it may become theoretically possible to predict every thought and action a person can have. An understanding of evolution indicates that the first organisms were made of physical molecules, which then evolved over billions to years into us. Given that molecules don't have "wills", anything which is made up of molecules shouldn't have free will. Thus, we shouldn't be expected to have free will.

### The Validity of Prayer

What about prayer? There has been research done on whether prayer actually exhibits supernatural effects. A study done on patients at American hospitals looked at the effects of intercessory prayer (i.e. prayer for an intervention on behalf of others). They found that there was no difference in complications between people who were versus weren't prayed for, if the person did not know they were being prayed for. However, if they knew they were being prayed for, there was a greater risk of complications<ref>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0002870305006496</ref>. This suggests that prayer does not have the supernatural effects it is often believed to have.

## Conclusion

Religion should probably be done away with culturally. While it has some value associated with it providing meaning and community to people, it generally makes false claims about the world and risks inhibiting progress in scientific/descriptive domains as a result. Purpose must be found in areas outside of religion, and it can be. People's relationships with one another can provide a strong sense of purpose, whether it be the raising of children, familial bonds, spousal bonds, the bonds between friends, and other relationships. We can also find purpose in other domains, through finding things which give us a sense of discovery, achievement, adventurism, and related emotions.

However, despite the flaws and limits of religion, and despite my view that it should be done away with, this doesn't mean that we can't learn anything from religion. Many religions, despite evolving, have remained successful in establishing many followers for millennia. This suggests that religion is a very powerful, and potentially even natural aspect of human societies. Future ways to give people meaning should follow from this, and perhaps create new pseudo-religions which are based on rationality, as opposed to false beliefs about the world, if desirable and necessary.

## References

<references />
