---
layout: page
title: Violent Resistance
permalink: /violent-resistance/
---

## Activism in General

Economic affluence, state capacity, women as a percentage of the total labor force and left corporatism (left party control and higher neocorporatism) contribute to greater aggregate protest potential. Ethnic grievances stemming from economic discrimination and percentage of protestants also contribute positively while language dominance suppresses protest potential<ref>https://www.jstor.org/stable/20628335?seq=1</ref>.

Mass political protests have increased globally by an annual average of 11.5 percent between 2009 and 2019. The size and frequency of recent protests are unprecedented historically, eclipsing historical examples of eras of mass protest. Common grievances overwhelmingly center on perceptions of ineffective governance and corruption. Protests have resulted in a broad range of outcomes, ranging from regime change and political accommodation to protracted political violence with many casualties. Factors that could increase the rate of protest include slowing global economic growth, worsening effects of climate change, and foreign meddling in internal politics via disinformation and other tactics<ref>https://www.csis.org/analysis/age-mass-protests-understanding-escalating-global-trend</ref>.

Social movement organizations (SMOs) and other civic organizations have historically been influential. The vast majority of studies suggest a positive relationship between movements or movement organizations and influence, but this disproportionately looks at large movements. Scholars of social movements have also found that certain issues and policies may be very difficult for movements to influence, including policies (a) closely tied to the national cleavage structure, (b) for which high levels of political or material resources are at stake, (c) regarding military matters, or (d) on which public opinion is very strong<ref>https://www.annualreviews.org/content/journals/10.1146/annurev-soc-070308-120029</ref>.

One study estimates that 42% of protest movements in the 21st century achieved some demonstrable gain in line with their aims. More concrete reforms for which specific identifiable bodies have responsibility were more likely achieved via protest. Broader structural or systemic change by more complex bodies was less likely to be achieved by protest. Gaining mass support is essential, especially for disadvantaged or otherwise marginalized groups given that politicians are typically most responsive to the preferences of the most affluent and best resourced<ref>https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/13684302241245660</ref>.

Looking at US black led protests between 1960-72, nonviolent protest triggers news framed in terms sympathetic to protesters, while violent protest led to a media focus on the need for law and order to control dangerous riots. Violent protest is met with police violence and shifts voting away from the cause, while nonviolent protest is met with voting towards the cause. Looking at the BLM protests 2020 and after, at the state level more protest was associated with more approved bills for police reform. However, at the city level more protest was associated with increases to police budgets in cities with larger shares of whites and republicans, suggesting a backlash against calls to defund the police<ref>https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/13684302241245660</ref>.

Scholarship on left-wing campus movements shows a history of notable successes, such as hundreds of academic programs on topics like black studies, women’s studies, and Asian-American studies that now exist. Conservative movements seem to be less successful in achieving their goals on American college campuses. This may speak to a structural issue, that left-wing movements are mobilizing on their home turf in a sense<ref>https://compass.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/soc4.12603</ref>.

Of the 34 largest single-day protests in the US, 32 promoted liberal causes. Student protesters tend to operate at Kohlberg’s postconventional level of moral judgment, while non-protestors score at the conventional level. Conventional morality is followed mostly by conservatives, while post-conventional morality is mostly followed by liberals. Liberals tend to be higher in political self-efficacy than conservatives, which is the belief that one’s public actions make a real difference. This may be a determinant of public protesting. High levels of openness to experience indicate a tendency to challenge tradition and establishments, which liberals tend to score high on. Protests require this and will thus most likely select for liberals. In contrast, conservatives prefer to work within traditional systems and respect the established order, and so may be more prone to engaging in activities, like voting, that adhere to these beliefs<ref>https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/cui-bono/202506/do-liberals-protest-more-than-conservatives</ref>.

## References

<references />
